


Kemp ignored health experts as virus raged
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
March 28, 2021 Sunday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2021 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: MAIN; Pg. 1A
Length: 3597 words
Byline: Alan Judd  Staff
Highlight: Governor often put economic concerns ahead of scientific recommendations, AJC analysis shows.  
Body




AJC EXCLUSIVE PANDEMIC
Gov. Brian Kemp already had reopened bars and restaurants, gyms and nightclubs, barber shops and tattoo parlors, amusement parks and summer camps. Next up: live entertainment venues.
That’s when Dr. Kathleen Toomey spoke up.
Toomey, Georgia’s public health commissioner, thought it would be impossible to stop the coronavirus from spreading through crowded concert halls, convention centers and sports stadiums.
So she had her lawyer write the governor’s lawyer to register her concerns.
Three days later, Kemp reopened the entertainment venues anyway.
This episode last June illustrates how, throughout the worst public health crisis in a century, Kemp repeatedly disregarded advice from Toomey, federal scientists and other experts, an examination by The Atlanta Journal-Constitution found.
Kemp describes his handling of the pandemic as informed by science, data and the judgment of experts. He has striven, he says, to preserve both “lives and livelihoods.”
But most often, the Journal-Constitution found, Kemp ranked economic concerns ahead of public health imperatives.
Kemp was one of the nation’s last governors to issue lockdown orders last spring — and then the first to begin lifting them, 22 days later. He never required Georgians to wear face coverings in public, even as 36 other states and the District of Columbia imposed mask mandates and as a White House task force strongly lobbied him to follow suit. And as hundreds of thousands of Georgians contracted COVID- 19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, and the death toll rose from hundreds to a few thousand to now approaching 20,000, Kemp declined to adjust his strategy and put into place new restrictions to slow the virus’ spread.
“It’s the community that defeats this virus, not the government,” he said last July 17.
“It’s going to be our citizens that flatten the curve by using best practices,” he said — 6,000 deaths later — on Dec. 7.
And on March 3 this year, after 9,000 more deaths in Georgia, Kemp said: “You don’t need a mandate to get people to do the right thing.”
Public health experts acknowledge that reversing the economy’s free fall last spring was critical. But they say if Kemp had put an equal priority on containing the virus, Georgia could have averted increasingly severe surges of infections and deaths.
“It’s one thing to say you’re following the science; it’s another thing to shoehorn the science into what you want it to be,” said Amber Schmidtke, a public health researcher who formerly taught at Mercer University’s medical school. “A lot of people were hurt, and a lot of people died when they didn’t need to.”
The Journal-Constitution assessed Kemp’s pandemic response by reviewing more than 15,000 pages of emails between Toomey and the governor and his staff, along with other documents, including reports by the White House coronavirus task force.
This examination found Kemp’s administration was slow to act on early warnings about the pandemic’s severity.
The governor’s aides, not public health officials, often determined strategy to contain the virus and dictated public messaging. And the state withheld critical information showing the pandemic was worsening as Kemp lifted restrictions.
In a statement Friday, Cody Hall, the governor’s communications director, said Kemp has “relied heavily on the advice and counsel of Dr. Toomey for literally thousands of decisions — and still does to this day.” Hall disputed some of the Journal-Constitution’s conclusions and said many other states “fared no better against COVID-19 than Georgia did” despite having imposed stricter controls.
Both Kemp and Toomey declined to be interviewed.
Members of their staffs were not authorized to speak on the record.
Kemp has consistently dismissed criticism over his handling of the pandemic, an unforeseen catastrophe that nonetheless is likely to define his legacy as governor.
He points to the state’s recovering economy as evidence that he took the correct course.
“We had to make some very tough choices during extraordinary times, and there is no playbook for this,”&Kemp said during a recent news conference. “Looking back one year, every day is a reminder of the things that we went through, the tough decisions that we made.”
The interplay between Kemp and Toomey — a seemingly mismatched duo of politician and scientist — drove Georgia’s pandemic response from the start.
Kemp is a businessman who entered politics almost 20 years ago. He exudes swagger and speaks in aphorisms, threatening to personally confiscate hoarded doses of the coronavirus vaccine and advising Georgians worried about the virus to “hunker down and keep choppin’.”
Toomey is a Harvard-educated physician with a four-decade career in public health. She worked in AIDS research, ran the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s outpost in Botswana and has twice served as the state health commissioner.
In public, she is soft-spoken and deferential to her boss, who appointed her in 2019.
She never overtly corrects Kemp’s misstatements and rarely veers off message.
“It’s not simply a public health decision,” Toomey said in an interview last year about Kemp’s reluctance to impose a statewide lockdown.
“There are also political implications I can’t possibly imagine and economic issues that I do not know about.”
Women in positions like Toomey’s have less freedom than their male counterparts to express contrary opinions, said state Rep. Rebecca Mitchell, D-Snellville, an epidemiologist who worked under Toomey in Botswana.
“You would lose your seat at the table,” Mitchell said.
“It’s an incredibly fraught position to stand in if you and the politicians aren’t on the same page.”
But by not publicly challenging Kemp, Toomey enabled the governor’s “anti-science” agenda, said Dr. Melanie Thompson, an infectious disease expert who founded and was the principal investigator for the AIDS Research Consortium of Atlanta.
“She is between a rock and a hard place,” Thompson said of Toomey. “If you push back too hard, you’re going to get fired. If you keep your job, you think you can do something positive. But it leaves us in a situation where the governor likes to say he’s following the science and yet he doesn’t. He likes to say he takes Dr. Toomey’s advice. I don’t know what advice she has given him, but I doubt that he has taken much of it.”
Early warnings
After the intense early weeks of the pandemic, Toomey took a moment to reflect.
“This is a wild ride,” she wrote to an official in the governor’s office. “Makes Ebola look easy because of the spread.”
By then, in late March, Toomey and others in Kemp’s administration were well aware of how bad the pandemic could get.
On March 2, Toomey and Homer Bryson, then director of the Georgia Emergency Management Agency, had received a risk assessment from Pinar Keskinocak, a professor of systems engineering who runs Georgia Tech’s Center for Health and Humanitarian Systems. Keskinocak advises governments on epidemics and other health calamities and worked with Georgia education officials during the H1N1 flu outbreak in 2009.
Keskinocak’s analysis was prescient.
“Given what we know of the community transmission patterns of the coronavirus, it is important for the public, businesses and governments to evaluate mass gatherings,” she wrote. “It is possible that we may see multiple ‘waves’ of this disease, as the virus mutates over time. It is important to consider preparation plans not just for short term — or a year — but also longer term as well.”
In an interview, Keskinocak said she didn’t know whether state officials acted on her assessment, which she submitted the same day Georgia confirmed its first two coronavirus cases.
Regardless, hers was the first in a series of alerts calling attention to the pandemic’s severity.
“Currently, there is moderate — and in several places, even widespread — community transmission of COVID- 19 in many parts of Georgia,”&Dr. Cherie Drenzek, the state epidemiologist, wrote in a “situation report” to Kemp and his staff on March 19.
“Rather than focusing on individual cases, we will be focusing (on) COVID-19 outbreaks in congregate settings.
… People should practice social distancing and remain home when ill.”
The state had confirmed 293 cases of the coronavirus so far. Twenty-five people had died.
Three days later, Dr. Sangmin Ryan Shin, a physician with Kaiser Permanente in Atlanta and a member of the state Board of Public Health, sent Toomey a more ominous warning.
Georgia was reaching an “inflection point,” Shin told Toomey, citing models projecting a spike in infections and fatalities in the coming days. He recommended that Kemp use a “hammer” to head off the surge: a full lockdown for most Georgians.
“We, (Kaiser Permanente) nationally, strongly recommend ‘shelter in place.’”
Toomey forwarded Shin’s email to two officials in Kemp’s office. Neither responded.
Despite the warnings, Kemp refused for weeks to shut down businesses or impose other restrictions.
Even when he announced Georgia’s first restrictions — the closure of bars and nightclubs — he described more extreme measures adopted by other states as “overreach.”
It wasn’t until April 2, a month after Keskinocak’s analysis, that Kemp closed many businesses and ordered Georgians to stay home except for essential errands. Thirty-nine governors already had issued similar orders.
But then, just 22 days later, Kemp allowed gyms, nail salons, bowling alleys and many other businesses to reopen. He let restaurants resume dining-room service on April 27.
Toomey stood by Kemp’s side as he ended the lockdown.
Even some of her admirers were shocked by her acquiescence.
“This approach flies in the face of science and evidence,”&Dr. Richard Ackerman, a physician in Macon, wrote to Toomey. “I might expect a politician to forward such a suggestion, but as the leader of public health in Georgia, you know better.
You must stand up and tell the truth, no matter the consequences.”
Ackerman did not respond to recent requests for an interview.
Toomey forwarded the email to the governor’s office, without comment.
After the lockdown ended, Kemp relied on Toomey to assert Georgia had sufficiently tamed the coronavirus to safely get back to business.
“The data are encouraging — and support a measured approach to reopening previously closed businesses and lifting the shelter-in-place order for people who are non-medically fragile or seniors,” Toomey told the governor’s coronavirus task force on April 30.
Her remarks that day were not entirely her own words.
Her statement came from the governor’s staff, delivered to Toomey by email hours before the meeting.
Lack of autonomy
The governor’s office approved Toomey’s remarks for weekly telephone briefings of state legislators. It oversaw her responses to inquiries from federal health officials. It produced a video in which she rebutted her own off-script comments during a press conference.
Kemp even assigned a top aide to work alongside Toomey as her acting chief of staff.
Caylee Noggle, Kemp’s chief management officer, had no experience in public health. Before joining the governor’s staff, she ran the agency that oversees Georgia’s Hope scholarship.
Hall, Kemp’s communications director, said Toomey asked the governor to assign Noggle to the Department of Public Health. Regardless, the appointment appeared to create tension from the start.
“I’m sure this will be met with lots of questions,” Noggle wrote to Toomey on May 7, after reviewing a draft of an announcement to the department’s staff, “so the only thing I might add for now is that this was based on our collective agreement — this wasn’t a mandate, but based on your decision with me.”
Toomey answered, “I think that’s clear from the messaging that I’m happy for you to be on board.”
“Ha — gotcha!” Noggle wrote back. “That’s great!”
Already, Toomey had little autonomy from the governor’s office, where Kemp’s aides often decided how and whether her department would share information on the pandemic. Hall said Toomey was free to edit the talking points, speeches and other remarks that Kemp’s aides drafted for her, but the governor’s office wanted to “ensure consistent and accurate information was being provided to the public.”
In April, the governor’s office told Toomey it wanted to give local government agencies, such as 911 call centers, the names and addresses of everyone in their communities who tested positive for the coronavirus — a list of people of whom first responders should be wary.
Toomey strongly objected.
That data could feed misinformation while also breaching patient confidentiality, she said. “I do not believe the 911 needs to know every single person infected.”
Tim Fleming, then Kemp’s chief of staff, pushed back.
“This is becoming a serious issue at the local level with first responders,” he wrote to Toomey. “If we need to ask the (attorney general) for guidance, we can.”
When Toomey offered a compromise that would protect individual privacy, Fleming dismissed it.
“I do not believe that this addresses the problem we are actually trying to solve here,” he wrote. “We will work on a draft of what the Governor wants to do and send it over.”
The state soon began sharing the information with local governments. At least one county sheriff posted “positive COVID-19 addresses” on Facebook.
‘Striking increases’
The afternoon of May 12, Kemp stood before a bank of socially distanced television cameras in the Capitol to announce good news. Hospitalizations caused by the virus were declining, he said, and fewer patients needed ventilators to breathe. The rate of positive coronavirus tests was falling, too.
Kemp said he was ending more coronavirus restrictions: Daycare centers could increase their capacities, and day camps could open for the summer. These actions, he said, were “based on data, science and the advice of our public health officials.”
Actually, Kemp repeatedly rejected advice from Toomey and other health officials as the pandemic’s second wave gathered in the late spring and early summer. Kemp touted a “slow, careful transition to a ‘new normal’” as he allowed more and more crowd-intensive activities to resume, despite the surge of new cases and deaths.
In May, officials at the Department of Public Health objected after they learned Kemp might reopen amusement parks.
“From a (public health) perspective, I have concerns with a large number of people, especially children that are difficult to social distance, congregating,” Chris Rustin, director of the department’s division of health protection, wrote to the governor’s office. Safety protocols submitted to the governor’s office by Six Flags Over Georgia, Rustin wrote, “will be challenging to realistically operationalize … on such a large scale.”
One day later, Kemp announced that amusement parks were free to reopen.
Bars and nightclubs began reopening June 1, and within days the governor’s office told Toomey that live entertainment venues would be next.
Toomey thought this was a bad idea because of the crowds the venues might attract. But rather than appealing directly to Kemp, she and Drenzek, the state epidemiologist, asked their agency’s general counsel to draft a formal objection.
“While they understand that it is important to reopen the state economy as quickly as possible, they recommend a more cautious approach,” lawyer Kristin Miller wrote.
“Without social distancing among spectators and patrons, they believe further spread of COVID-19 is likely,” Miller added. “They feel it is too early to consider opening these venues for large gatherings.”
David Dove, Kemp’s general counsel, replied: “I will pass your recommendations to the governor and staff.”
Kemp wasn’t swayed. He signed an executive order reopening the venues three days later.
Miller, who has since left the public health agency, declined to comment.
As Kemp worked to restart the economy, ominous trends were emerging. Drenzek reported on June 18 that case numbers had increased by 30% in a week. And while earlier clusters had mostly affected long-term care facilities, she wrote, now there were “many more outbreaks among employees at workplaces.”
Just in the past week, she added, hot spots included grocery stores, a tire store, an automobile dealership, a bank, fast-food restaurants, a sports bar, a body shop and several Walmarts.
“Outbreaks in churches are also trending upward,” she wrote.
On June 29, Drenzek’s situation report for the governor noted, in bold type, “Daily Case Counts are consistently higher than they have ever been in Georgia.”
Then, on June 30, Drenzek reported “striking increases” in coronavirus numbers.
Cases were up another 63%, and only 17 of Georgia’s 159 counties were reporting fewer than 50 cases per 100,000 residents.
None of Drenzek’s reports were made public at the time, however, and Kemp’s order opening entertainment venues took effect on July 1.
That day, Kemp and Toomey left Atlanta for a two-day fly-around, urging residents of Columbus and Albany, Valdosta and Dalton, Augusta and Brunswick to observe social distancing, wash their hands frequently, and — voluntarily — wear masks.
Sidestepping questions
While Kemp was on the flyaround, a letter from 1,400 Georgia health care workers arrived in his office. It contained a grim forecast of additional suffering from an unchecked virus.
“Georgia is simply not prepared for a surge in cases and hospitalizations,” the health care workers told Kemp.
“You have the power to do much more to save lives and protect our citizens from avoidable illness.”
The health care workers asked Kemp to close bars and nightclubs again and to prohibit indoor gatherings of more than 25 people.
Most important, they pleaded with Kemp to mandate that Georgians wear facial masks in public. Federal health officials say facial coverings are the most effective means of containing the virus, and early research supports that contention. One study, reported last month by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, found that COVID-19 hospitalizations decreased by as much as 5.6 percentage points within four weeks after states mandated mask usage.
Neither Kemp nor his aides responded to the letter — or to a follow-up a month later, signed by more than 2,100 health care workers.
“It’s pretty clear this governor keeps his eye on the politics, not on the science,” said Melanie Thompson, the AIDS researcher, who was one of four lead signers of the letter. “Our input didn’t jibe with what he wanted to do.”
It is not clear whether Toomey, like an overwhelming majority of other public&health officials, favors a mask mandate. Her public statements have avoided taking a stand that might conflict with Kemp’s.
Asked last June, during a virtual question-and-answer session sponsored by the Metro Atlanta Chamber, whether a mask mandate would reduce coronavirus infections and save lives, Toomey said, “Wearing masks is an effective and easy tool to reduce the spread of the virus in our communities.”
Then, asked whether she supported a mandate, she replied, “The governor and I are strongly recommending that Georgians wear masks when social distancing isn’t possible.”
With mandatory mask usage off the table, Georgia officials scrambled in July to explain the state’s strategy to the White House coronavirus task force. Federal officials thought Georgia should close bars again and limit restaurant seating in counties where the virus was spreading fast — and mandate the use of masks.
Several officials at the Department of Public Health punted. Justifying the lack of a mask mandate, one wrote, was “a little bit outside our purview.”
Ultimately, Toomey asked two officials in the governor’s office to approve an answer that sidestepped the question: “Masks are recommended for all settings where social distancing cannot be observed.”
Ryan Loke, Kemp’s health care adviser, signed off on sending the response to the White House.
“All good,” he wrote.
Never a mandate
The degree to which Toomey influenced Kemp’s decisions about the coronavirus may never be known.
As the pandemic moved into its second year, he invoked her advice less frequently in public, especially as other states began relaxing coronavirus restrictions.
On March 3, Kemp used an interview on CNBC to promote his business-friendly coronavirus strategy, saying he had taken a “measured approach” from the start.
“We’ve been open for the most part the whole time,” Kemp said. “We did two things at once. We protected lives, but we also had to protect livelihoods and keep our businesses going.”
He reminded the interviewer he had never required Georgians to wear face masks.
“It was never about a mandate,” he said. “You don’t need a mandate to get people to do the right thing. Our numbers are as good or bad as anybody else.”
That day, Georgia’s death toll from COVID-19 reached 15,349. Its death rate remained higher than that of 35 other states. It ranked at or near the bottom of states in administered coronavirus vaccines.
One year in, the pandemic raged on.
HOW WE GOT THE STORY
This story is based in part on 15,751 pages of emails obtained under the Georgia Open Records Act. The Atlanta Journal- Constitution requested the documents from the state Department of Public Health on May 13 last year.
The agency initially said it had suspended its compliance with the records law for the duration of the coronavirus emergency.
In July, it said it would provide the records at a cost of about $2,700. The newspaper paid the retrieval fee, but the agency did not turn over the documents until Jan. 28 — 8½ months after the law requires and then only after the Journal-Constitution threatened legal action.&
 Load-Date: March 28, 2021

 

End of Document


AJC DIGGING DEEPER HIGHER EDUCATION; ; $8.25M for 4 schools called diversity investment in data science pipeline
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 6, 2019 Saturday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2019 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: METRO; Pg. 1B
Length: 814 words
Byline: Eric Stirgus  Staff
Highlight: UnitedHealth Group is partnering with the AU Center schools.  
Body




Joshua Atkins remembers business leaders telling him during his second year at Morehouse College that many students there lacked the data skills necessary to excel at their companies.
Atkinswasmotivated, hesaid, "to be on the other side of that trend."
A year later, Atkins took a data analytics course on campus and got an internship at Accenture. This fall, the 21-year-old Morehouse College graduate said he'll be working at the global consulting firm.
Data science -- using math, science and statistics to solve problems -- is one of the highest in-demand careers, but educators and business leaders say there are not enough African Americans in the industry (about 7%, some say).UnitedHealth Group announced Tuesday it is investing $8.25 million during the next five years toward an effort to enhance data science education at Atlanta's historically black colleges and universities.
UnitedHealth Group leaders and the schools began discussing a partnership about two years ago, officials said. Four schools -- Clark Atlanta University, Morehouse, Morehouse School of Medicine and Spelman College -- will participate in the effort.
"I'm now looking at these talented young leaders gathered here today as a new generation that can help us responsibly unleash the power of big data," said UnitedHealth Group CEO David S. Wichmann.
Atlanta University Center Consortium leaders say the money will be used for scholarships and software to improve the technological capabilities across the schools. The schools will also offer certificates for midcareer professionals. All four schools currently have courses related to data science, but none offers a degree. The schools are working on next steps in how best to offer data science coursework or degrees.
The students have ideas for using data science to address issues such as health disparities in underserved communities locally and globally. Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms said at Tuesday's event that the work will be important, noting the city's high HIV rates.
"I cannot stress how impactful this will be on our city," she said.
Students who've taken data science courses or use the technology said they can envision working on projects to improve things that bother all college students, such as improving the financial aid process or on-campus housing. Students like Clark Atlanta University senior Michael English have used the technology to do research that could reduce airport passenger wait times.
"I learned how big data is the next thing," said English, 26.
Many African American students enroll in college with little expertise in data-related subjects. Todd Greene, the consortium's executive director, said about one-third of predominantly African American high schools don't offer algebra or calculus courses that teach students skills they'll need for college data science courses.
"We need to also work on our pipeline," Greene said.
Nationally, there are a labor gap and a skills gap, Wichmann said. Job postings for data scientists rose 29%between December 2017 and December 2018, according to an Indeed report. The University of Georgia last September became the first school in the University System of Georgia to offer an undergraduate major in data science. The new program will begin with its first cohort of undergraduates in the fall semester of 2019, officials said.
UnitedHealth Group has about 35,000 technologists and health data specialists, Wichmann said.He's hoping the company's investment will, in part, pay off with future hires from racially diverse backgrounds.
During one meeting between students and faculty, Morehouse School of Medicine doctoral student Kaylin Carey said she was unaware of some of the data research tools being used by Spelman's biology department.
"I can learn something from you and maximize what I know," said Carey, 24, whose interest in cancer biology was sparked after her grandmother was diagnosed with ovarian cancer.
The initiative highlights efforts by the schools to establish major academic partnerships, which leaders there say are necessary as operational costs rise at college campuses.
The partnerships are also necessary to conduct top-tier research, said Greene.
"We want to be a hub for other HBCUs ... and for some of the research questions that face black America," Greene said.
(Box)
MORE DETAILS
$91,000: Average salary for data scientists
1: Ranking of data science among the nation's top jobs of 2019
2.35 million: Data science job listings in 2015
7%: Percentage of African Americans in the data science industry
SOURCES: ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CENTER CONSORTIUM, GLASSDOOR.COM, PAYSCALE
$91,000: Average salary for data scientists
1: Ranking of data science among the nation's top jobs of 2019
2.35 million: Data science job listings in 2015
7%: Percentage of African Americans in the data science industry
SOURCES: ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CENTER CONSORTIUM, GLASSDOOR.COM, PAYSCALE
 Load-Date: July 6, 2019

 

End of Document


Black talent luring tech titans to Atlanta
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
March 7, 2021 Sunday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2021 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: MAIN; Pg. 1A
Length: 1763 words
Byline: Andy Peters  Staff
Highlight: » Microsoft, Google, Airbnb, Apple, others look to increase diversity.  
Body




LOCAL IN-DEPTH TECHNOLOGY
Ernest Holmes was very popular after he graduated from Morehouse College in 2019 with a double major in computer science and math.
He fielded job offers from Microsoft, Adobe, Salesforce and Chickfil-A, but ultimately accepted the one he really wanted: a position with Google in Mountain View, California.
Holmes lived in Silicon Valley for almost two years and planned to stay with Google indefinitely.
But he learned that he didn’t need to stay in California to do that.
He moved back to Atlanta this year and is assigned to Google’s local office. He continues to work on the same project as before, developing an open-source operating system.
“I just purchased two properties here for myself and my sister,” he said.
Google and other West Coast tech giants are looking for more young talent like Holmes, and they are focusing their search on Atlanta.
Economic development recruiters here have long touted low taxes, few regulations, no unions, cheap real estate, the airport and weather.
In the past year, another local attribute has become a powerful magnet: Black college graduates with degrees in computer science and engineering.
After the Black Lives Matter protests last summer, big American employers vowed to improve racial diversity in their ranks.
That included the tech industry, which has a lot of catching up to do.
Since last summer, Microsoft, Airbnb, Apple and Google have announced expansion plans or major investments in Atlanta.
Such moves could make technology the leading driver of the city’s economic growth.
After seeing young tech talent flock to places like San Francisco and Seattle for years, now “we get to cut this brain drain off to the rest of the country,” said Pat Wilson, commissioner of the Georgia Department of Economic Development.
He added the state regularly uses Black tech talent as a selling point.
It’s not a sure thing quite yet.
Microsoft, Google and Airbnb haven’t disclosed how many jobs each plans to create in Georgia.
Microsoft has not said when it will break ground at its Westside development and Airbnb has not chosen a building for its Atlanta hub.
Demand for young Black tech talent also may soon outpace supply if institutions of higher education can’t keep up.
“We’re reaching a critical point where the level of Black college graduates in Atlanta won’t be enough,” said Joey Womack, CEO of Atlanta-based Goodie Nation, which arranges financing for technology training programs for young people.
A responsibility to make things right
Technology companies have a responsibility to make things work, too, according to management consulting firms. They must give new Black hires the same opportunities as their colleagues, something experts say has been a constant struggle.
Otherwise, companies risk losing their newly hired talent.
Some advocacy groups say that an explosion in the Black tech scene may do little to boost the rest of metro Atlanta’s Black population, at least quickly. Despite being known as a “Black Mecca” and “the city of Black professionals,” most African Americans in Atlanta don’t have a college degree, let alone one in tech. Poverty and jobless rates also have been higher than among white residents for decades.
Still, it’s easy to see why Atlanta has captured the attention of the U.S. technology industry.
Georgia State University enrolled nearly 11,500 undergraduate students in 2019 who identified as Black, according to the National Center for Education Statistics. Kennesaw State University enrolled about 7,200 such students and Georgia Tech about 1,100.
The city’s historically Black colleges and universities also&have proven to be a huge draw for tech companies.
The combined enrollment at Clark Atlanta University, Morehouse College and Spelman College was about 7,700 in 2019.
The picture is very different on the West Coast, where many tech giants are based. The University of Washington in Seattle, the state’s largest college, had a Black undergraduate population of about 2,200 in 2019. The University of California at Berkeley enrolled about 1,800, Stanford University in Silicon Valley had 490, and Caltech in Pasadena had 45.
“People are walking around Silicon Valley and other cities trying to solve diversity, but those aren’t diverse cities to begin with, right?” said Paul Judge, an Atlanta entrepreneur who invests in Atlanta companies with minority founders.&
HP was the only West Coastbased technology company to place in online publication DiversityInc’s 2020 ranking of corporations based on diversity.
The Black workforce at Microsoft makes up about 5% of employees and 3% of managers, the Seattle company said in an October blog post. Google said in its 2020 diversity annual report that about 4% of its employees are Black.
By contrast, about 13% of the U.S. population is African American.
In metro Atlanta and Georgia, it’s about 33%. In the city of Atlanta, it’s about 50%.
Microsoft, which has bought 90 acres at Quarry Yards since last summer, plans to double the number of Black managers and senior leaders in the U.S. by 2025, according to its October proxy statement.
Google plans to more than double its Black workforce outside of senior-level executives by 2025, partly by hiring 10,000 new employees in Atlanta, Washington, Chicago and New York.
Last year it tapped Atlanta tech entrepreneur Jewel Burks Solomon to lead Google for Startups, a position based here.
Last month, Airbnb specifically cited Atlanta’s Black talent pool for its decision to open a tech hub here. The San Francisco-based company wants to increase underrepresented minorities in its U.S. workforce to 20% by 2025, up from about 12% now. Blacks, Latinos and Native Americans are considered underrepresented minorities.
Cupertino, California-based Apple is partnering with Southern Co. to develop a $50 million&tech hub at the Atlanta University Center Consortium, which groups together the city’s HBCUs. About 6% of Apple’s U.S. workforce was Black as of 2018, according to its yearly diversity report.
Diverse executive teams get higher equity returns
Management consultants and investment firms have urged tech companies to get busy on fixing their diversity deficit. Trillium Asset Management, a Boston money manager, has targeted two Atlanta companies with workforce-diversity proposals, Home Depot and Carter’s, in addition to several West Coast tech companies.
“Highly diverse executive teams have higher returns on equity and earnings performance than those with low diversity,” Trillium wrote in a proposal to Marriott International shareholders last year.
Relative to other major cities, Atlanta boasts not only a large overall pool of Black college graduates, but also a sizable number who majored in computer science, engineering, math and data science.
Georgia Tech awarded 153 bachelor’s degrees in engineering to Black students in 2019, the most of any U.S. college. Kennesaw State ranked 10th, with 87.
The biggest employers of Georgia State graduates, as of 2021, include locally based mainstays like Home Depot and UPS, said Tim Renick, executive director of the National Institute for Student Success. But the top 10 list also includes Apple, Google and NCR. “A few years ago, you would not have found those companies on this list,” he said.
Facebook, Twitter and Uber Technologies started recruiting at Georgia State this year, specifically for jobs in their West Coast offices, Renick said.
Georgia State has expanded its computer science program to keep pace, hiring new faculty members. The school graduated 204 Black computer science majors last year, a 25% increase from 2018.
Kennesaw State has made a concerted effort to recruit more Black students to its computer and engineering programs, said president Pamela Whitten. First-year Black students in the College of Computing and Software Engineering rose to 27% of total enrollment last year from 22% in 2019.
Many of the college’s ideas for technology courses come directly from employers. “We have industry advisory boards who inform us how we can adapt our curriculum to meet their needs,” Whitten said.
Still, demand may soon overwhelm supply. Some 86% of Black eighth-graders in Georgia public schools were considered not proficient in math in 2018, compared with 57% among white students, according to the Annie E. Casey Foundation.
Some Black business leaders in Atlanta have provided financial support and training expertise to help younger students. Womack’s nonprofit group, Goodie Nation, has given grants to fund engineering, math and robotics programs in local K-12 schools.
“Unfortunately, not enough attention is being paid to the K-12 level,” which could lead to fewer homegrown Black students enrolling in computer science programs at Atlanta-area colleges, Womack warned.
Tech companies also risk losing the Black employees they tried to recruit if they don’t provide them with equal chances for advancement.
“A lot of companies have made commitments to hire Black talent with no commitment to adjust their processes to help those hires thrive and grow,” said Joanne Stephane, a principal at Deloitte Consulting who advises corporations on human resources issues.
Holmes, the Google employee who moved back to Atlanta, also said it’s not as easy as just opening an office here. He said Morehouse, his alma mater, needs more resources and has struggled to retain through graduation all the students who declare as a computer science major during their freshman year.
“They think they can just show up and find hundreds of engineers and software designers in Atlanta,” he said. “But there’s a lot more to it than that.”
Staff reporter Christopher Quinn and data specialist Jennifer Peebles contributed reporting.
‘People are walking around Silicon Valley and other cities trying to solve diversity, but those aren’t diverse cities to begin with, right?’
Paul Judge Atlanta entrepreneur who invests in Atlanta companies with minority founders& &
MORE DETAILS
Recent Atlanta announcements by West Coast tech giants
Microsoft will add 1,500 jobs this year at a new office at Atlantic Station, and create thousands of additional jobs in metro Atlanta in coming years on the Westside and in new suburban data centers.
Airbnb will open an engineering hub and hire hundreds of workers. Its exact timetable and number of jobs has not been disclosed.
Apple announced in January it will partner with Southern Co. on a $50 million technology center at the Atlanta University Center.
Google will create 10,000 new jobs in Atlanta, Washington, D.C., Chicago and New York by 2025. It hasn’t broken out the exact number of jobs for Atlanta.
 Load-Date: March 7, 2021

 

End of Document


Tech giant sees Atlanta as major hub
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
February 12, 2021 Friday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2021 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: METRO; Pg. 1B
Length: 980 words
Byline: Andy Peters  Staff
Highlight: Microsoft’s planned expansion could bring thousands of jobs in the coming years.  
Body




AJC TOP LOCAL STORY MICROSOFT
Microsoft President Brad Smith said the company plans to make metro Atlanta a major hub as it embarks on a significant expansion.
The tech giant is adding two regional data centers and could bring thousands of jobs to 90 acres of land it bought in recent months at the stalled Quarry Yards development on the city’s Westside.
“You don’t buy 90 acres if you don’t have plans to grow substantially,”
Smith told The Atlanta Journal-Constitution in an interview.
He declined to provide specific details or a timetable for Quarry Yards, one of the largest undeveloped tracts of greenspace near the city center, beyond saying it would set aside a quarter of the development for affordable housing before building any offices.
But Smith placed Microsoft’s potential growth here in the context of its two largest locations — metro Seattle, where about 62,000 Microsoft employees are based, and Silicon Valley and San Francisco, which have a combined 7,000 employees.
All of Microsoft’s business divisions will have workers assigned to Atlanta, Smith said. The company’s businesses range from cloud computing to consumer products such as Word and Excel.
“It will be one of our important hubs,” he said.
Microsoft declined to say how many workers it currently employs in metro Atlanta, but it’s likely around 1,000. It operates a corporate sales office in Alpharetta and an innovation center downtown, which provides a “comprehensive set of technology, tools and services to startups, governments, students and faculty,” according to the company.
The company is already in the process of hiring and moving 1,500 workers into a new office near Atlantic Station.
The $75 million project, announced last year, is focused on cloud computing and artificial intelligence.
Smith said the company will have 2,500 workers in metro Atlanta once the Atlantic Station office opens.
Microsoft said it is also adding two data centers, one in Douglasville and another in East Point. That is in addition to the 250,000-square-foot data center it is building in south Fulton County. While such projects can cost a lot of money and bring many construction jobs, they typically don’t produce a lot of full-time jobs.
Georgia’s emphasis on workforce training helped attract Microsoft, Gov. Brian Kemp said at a Thursday news conference.
“If you build anything, if you don’t have people to work in that facility it doesn’t make sense to do that,” Kemp said.
Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms said she stressed that Microsoft should recruit from a wide range of the Atlanta community, to “make sure we’re getting people in the line for technical training, providing mentorships to people who may have family members” who have not attended college.
The broader expansion should burnish Atlanta’s reputation as a regional tech hub that provides a diverse workforce. Microsoft will recruit heavily from Georgia Tech and Clark Atlanta University, Morehouse College and Spelman College, three historically black colleges and universities. It’s already developed a relationship with the Atlanta University Center colleges, partnering with Morehouse to provide tablets to all new students.
Microsoft will primarily recruit graduates with computer science, software development and data science degrees, Smith said.
The West Coast tech company also has partnered with the CDC Foundation to create a pandemic-response center here. And it may participate in a proposed health care innovation district in Midtown. Smith declined to comment on Microsoft’s plans for Atlanta in health care technology.
Quarry Yards is located in a rapidly developing area near the Beltline path, a new 280- acre Westside Park at Bellwood Quarry, and the Bankhead MARTA rail station.
Microsoft has been mum until now about its plans for the 90 acres of land it purchased in two tranches since last year.
As reported last year, an investor group that included former Atlanta Braves slugger Mark Teixeira sold its 70-acre Quarry Yards site last September to a buyer affiliated with Microsoft for $127 million.
The seller, Urban Creek Partners, had planned to develop housing, offices and retail, but had only done a small amount of site work.
Microsoft acquired another roughly 20 acres of land near the Bankhead MARTA station for $22.5 million last December.
Smith said the company will not release detailed plans until after it meets with community leaders. The plans could change, depending on community input.
The area was in decline until recent years, and longtime residents are concerned about being pushed out by the rapid development.
Atlanta’s city council placed a moratorium on new building permits in the neighborhood last year unless they are for affordable housing.
Michael Ford, Microsoft’s corporate vice president of global real estate and security, said the company wants to encourage private developers to add a grocery store, pharmacy and bank branch to the Grove Park neighborhood, amenities it currently lacks.
Debra Edelson, executive director of the Grove Park Foundation, a nonprofit group that partners with schools and community organizations on education, health and arts projects, said she was pleased Microsoft pledged to include the community in its Quarry Yards plans and that more should be done to help longtime residents.
“The market forces pushing westward into the community have driven up the cost of living significantly in just a few short years,” she said in a statement.
Where is Microsoft building?
The tech giant has recently purchased 90 acres of land at the stalled Quarry Yards development on Atlanta’s Westside.
The company is already in the process of hiring and moving 1,500 workers into a new office near Atlantic Station.
Microsoft said it is also adding two data centers, one in Douglasville and another in East Point.
They are also adding a 250,000-square-foot data center in south Fulton County.
 Load-Date: February 12, 2021

 

End of Document


AJC LOCAL IN-DEPTH SCHOOL VOLUNTEERS; ; National honor helps volunteers build knowledge, skill for future
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
September 24, 2019 Tuesday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2019 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: METRO; Pg. 7B
Length: 719 words
Byline: Arvlinda Smith Broady  Staff
Highlight: Spirit of Community winners also can earn cash prizes.  
Body




Although volunteer hours have become a graduation requirement for most students, the philosophy behind it wasn't to create yet another thing for teens to do. Philanthropic organizations throughout the world tout the benefits not only to the organizations but to the kids themselves.
Gaining new skills and knowledge, growing in maturity and discovering a hidden passion are often the result of helping others.
The Prudential Spirit of Community Awards wants to add to the benefits by honoring America's top youth volunteers. Through Nov. 5, middle and high school students who make a difference can receive state and national recognition for those good deeds as well a chance to receive $1,000 as a state winner and $5,000 as a national winner.
In 2017, two Georgia state-level winners went on to become national winners as well.
The AJC recently caught up with Amal Bhatnagar, a graduate of Northview High School, and Kelsey Norris, a ninth-grade special education student at Veterans High School in Warner Robins.
Bhatnagar, now a junior at University of California at Berkeley, has a dual major in data science and economics. While in high school he created a foundation, First Aid for All, that provides first-aid kits to people in the U.S. and overseas who lack access to basic health care.
Through volunteering at local hospitals, he saw patients whose innocuous bruises had progressed into infected lacerations because they did not have basic first-aid supplies. "I realized that a bandage, such a trivial health care supply, was so effective and yet so elusive for under-served, powerless populations," he said.
His foundation has reached out to the needy in Greece and India as well as victims of Hurricanes Harvey and Irma.
The passion fostered through those initial contacts grew to a new desire to help in another way. He's helping create a class that studies the intersection between data science and economics using real data and Python, a programming language. "We are building a free online, open-source interactive textbook," he said. "There is a huge demand for this. We are currently teaching 30 undergraduate students at Berkeley with the focus on democratizing access to data science education."
Winning the Prudential award exposed him to opportunities he may not have encountered otherwise.
"I was a judge the following year and met several influential people," he said.
Kelsey began life in a Russian orphanage. "The doctors did not know if she would ever walk or talk," said her mother, Carol Norris.
Diagnosed with intellectual disabilities, autism and Rubenstein-Taybi syndrome, Kelsey stays busy with gymnastics, dance and swim team as well as logging over 3,500 documented community service hours.
After winning the national Prudential Spirit of Community Award, she went on to receive the 2018 International "Yes I Can!" Award.
In addition to winning several other awards for service to others, she has raised over $30,000 to help children in need and their families and has written grant proposals totaling over $25,000 to fund autism awareness outreach materials, school health clinic supplies, nutritious food and sports equipment for economically deprived children.
Both Amal and Kelsey encourage students to apply for the Prudential award.
Through a blog he writes for the Tiimes of India, Amal interviews CEOs, entrepreneurs and private equity owners about their experiences.
"At first, this was intimidating, as the people I was talking to were decades older than me. However, my passion for what I was doing helped me overcome any intimidation and nervousness," he said, adding that volunteering is a good way to find self-confidence. "Age doesn't matter as long as you're passionate about what you're doing."
(Box)
MORE DETAILS
|Apply for the Prudential Spirit of Community award: https://spirit.prudential.com/apply/2020 |Learn more about Amal Bhatnagar spirit.prudential.com/honoree/2018/ga/amalbhatnagar
https://d8a-88.github.io/ |Learn more about Kelsey Norris
spirit.prudential.com/honoree/2018/ga/kelsey-norris
|Apply for the Prudential Spirit of Community award: https://spirit.prudential.com/apply/2020 |Learn more about Amal Bhatnagar spirit.prudential.com/honoree/2018/ga/amalbhatnagar
https://d8a-88.github.io/ |Learn more about Kelsey Norris
spirit.prudential.com/honoree/2018/ga/kelsey-norris
 Load-Date: September 24, 2019

 

End of Document


AJC TOP STORY: CORONAVIRUS OUTBREAK AJC EXCLUSIVE; ; White House warns of viral spread in Georgia
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
August 14, 2020 Friday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2020 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1992 words
Byline: J.Scott Trubey and Greg Bluestein  Staff
Highlight: Report calls for mask mandate, closing some businesses.  
Body




President Donald Trump's coronavirus task force warns that Georgia continues to see "widespread and expanding community viral spread" and that the state's current policies aren't enough to curtail COVID-19.
The task force "strongly recommends" Georgia adopt a statewide mandate that citizens wear masks, joining a chorus of public health officials, Democrats and others who have warned that Gov. Brian Kemp's refusal to order face coverings has plunged the state into deeper crisis and will prolong recovery.
"Current mitigation efforts are not having a sufficient impact," the report said.
Businesses such as nightclubs, bars and gyms, currently open with some restrictions in Georgia, should be closed in the highest risk counties, the report said.
The task force recommends restricting indoor dining at restaurants, now limited only by the number of diners who can be safely distanced 6 feet apart, to less than one-quarter of dining room capacity. Social gatherings, now capped at 50 people in Georgia, should be limited to 10 or fewer people.
Georgia also needs to ramp up testing and contact tracing statewide, the report said, and testing and infection control measures need to be expanded in nursing homes and other long-term care facilities.
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution obtained the White House Coronavirus Task Force recommendations for Georgia, dated Aug. 9, from a source.
Dr.Melanie Thompson, principal investigator of the AIDS Research Consortium of Atlanta, said it is frustrating that the report is only seeing the light of day because of a leak.
"These are public health data, and they should be publicly available," she said.
Most states require masks
Though Kemp has encouraged Georgians to wear masks, Georgia is one of 16 states without some form of statewide mask mandate. Kemp said he believes a statewide requirement is unnecessary and unenforceable.
Kemp's emergency orders explicitly bar cities from enacting mask mandates or enacting any measures stricter or less restrictive than his.
On Thursday, Kemp withdrew a lawsuit challenging the city of Atlanta's mask mandate and business restrictions, but officials say he plans a new order by Saturday that would specify that local governments can't order private businesses to require masks.
Dr.CarlosdelRio, executiveassociate dean at Emory University School of Medicine at Grady Health System, said the White House recommendations are not political and are based on sound science.
Del Rio is part of a group of more than 2,000 medical professionals who have urged Kemp in a pair of open letters to enact a mask mandate and curtail operations of bars, gyms and nightclubs and allow local governments to institute tough restrictions if necessary.
"We're not doing anything, and we're hoping magically numbers are going to go down," he said of Georgia's coronavirus response. "Hope is not a strategy."
The AJC asked Kemp's office why the governor has refused to follow the task force recommendations to close businesses such as bars and nightclubs that are at high risk of spread.
Kemp spokesman Cody Hall did not directly answer the questions.
"Gov. Kemp continues to rely on data, science and the public health advice of Dr. (Kathleen) Toomey and her team in our state's ongoing battle against COVID-19," Hall said, referencing the state's public health commissioner. "As the governor has said many times before, this fight is about protecting the lives -- and livelihoods -- of all Georgians."
Hall said the state is expanding its testing resources, including a new North Carolina-based lab partner and the recently opened temporary testing "mega-site" at the Atlanta airport. Georgia has reported 25,000 or more new tests in eight out of the past nine days, Hall said.
In addition to federal supplies, the state has partnered with longterm care centers to boost testing, and Hall stressed other steps the statehastakentocontrolinfections.
But COVID Exit Strategy, a nonprofit and nonpartisan public health initiative, estimates Georgia is only testing about one-quarter the amount it needs to per day to curtail the virus.
Swift criticism
Kemp's critics reacted to the White House report with dismay and anger.
State Rep. William Boddie, one of the top Democrats in the House, questioned why the governor is refusing to act more decisively.
"He needs to adhere to the science. He says he's looking at data, but I'm asking what that data is telling him," Boddie said. "Georgia is in the top tier of COVID-19 cases in the country. It doesn't make any sense to me. We need to mandate masks and a uniform way of attacking the coronavirus. And it has to start with him."
Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottomsisamongseveralmayorswho, frustrated by Kemp's rollback of restrictions, have defied his order and imposed their own limits.
In a statement, Bottoms said "the science and data clearly show that Georgia remains on a dangerous trajectory."
"We will never get to the other side of this pandemic if we do not heed the warnings of our health professionals and wear masks, practice social distancing and stop behaving as if COVID-19 will suddenly disappear," she said.
The disastrous reopening of some school districts has also filtered to the campaign trail.
State Rep. Beth Moore has collected more than 650 tips from students, parents and teachers about problems in schools since in-person learning resumed in some districts, and she's been among the more vocal critics of Kemp's coronavirus policy.
"Governor Kemp is aligning himself with anti-science extremists who believe that masks don't help, the virus is a hoax and we should all just bury our heads in the sand and pray the virus goes away," said Moore, a Peachtree Corners Democrat. "The fact that a school whistleblower effort is even necessary to ensure the protection of students, faculty and their families demonstrates how poorly Kemp has handled the coronavirus pandemic in Georgia."
Some Republicans say more needs to be done.State Rep.Chuck Efstration, R-Dacula, on Thursday said he would introduce legislation next year that would speed the availability of same-day test coronavirus test results and create a new state certification for businesses who comply with health state safety guidelines. 'Seeing the consequences'
Georgia was one of the last states to order its residents to shelter in place in April and one of the most aggressive states to reopen its economy. Georgia reported week-over-week case increases in nine out of 10 weeks from early May through mid-July, peaking at 25,471 cases the week of July 12.
In the three full weeks since, Georgia has reported a slight decline in weekly cases, but the seven-day rolling average remains more than five times the level reported at the beginning of June.
On Thursday, the state Department of Public Health (DPH) reported 2,515 net new cases of the virus and 82 net new confirmed deaths.
The White House report examined data from Aug. 1 to Aug. 7 and was a follow up to one dated July 26 that labeled Georgia as one of 21 states in the "red zone." The new assessment found Georgia's case rate declining slightly, but new case growth and the numbers testing positive for the virus still put Georgia in the red zone.
Georgia'srateofspreadremained nearly double the national average, the task force said.
Deaths, meanwhile, have been climbing.
On Tuesday, DPH reported a record of 122 net new confirmed deaths, followed by the second-highest daily total
Wednesday of 105. To date, 4,538 deaths
in Georgia have been attributed to COVID-19.
Georgia also has set weekly records for reported deaths in each of the past three weeks.
"I hate to say it, but we are not doing enough in Georgia, and we are seeing the consequences," del Rio said.
Of Georgia's 159 counties, 109 are in the task force's red zone for transmission and test positivity, including Clayton among the core 10 metro Atlanta counties. Cherokee, Cobb, DeKalb, Douglas, Fulton, Gwinnett and Rock-dale are in the yellow zone.
The White House report also reveals information not previously disclosed by DPH, including test positivity by county during the week of Aug. 1 to Aug. 7. Most Georgia counties report test positivity of greater than 10%, including much of east and southeast Georgia, which were greater than 20%.
(Box)
THE LATEST DEVELOPMENTS Dr.John D.Marshall Jr. ofAmericus is the first practicing Georgia physician killed by the novel coronavirus, A6 THE VIRUS IN GEORGIA As ofThursday afternoon 228,668 CONFIRMED CASES 4,538 CONFIRMED DEATHS
For daily statewide updates, go to ajc.com/cvupdate
MORE DETAILS Listed below are the White House Coronavirus Task Force's top five recommendations to contain "widespread and expanding community viral spread"in Georgia.
TASK FORCE RECOMMENDATION
Ensure access to rapid testing at nursing homes, assisted living and long-term care homes.Ensure universal social distancing and face mask use at facilities.Conduct infection control surveys at nursing homes with more than three cases in three weeks.
Implement a statewide mask mandate.
Close bars, nightclubs, entertainment venues and other establishments where social distancing cannot occur in red zone counties.
Limit indoor dining to under 25%occupancy; expand outdoor dining.
Limit social gatherings to 10 or fewer people. CURRENT GEORGIA POLICY
All facilities do not have access to rapid testing. Social distancing is required of all Georgians; mask use is encouraged but not required. Georgia was among the last states to complete required infection control surveys byJuly 31. The Department of Community Health said it is conducting surveys that will meet or exceed this standard for nursing homes.
Georgia is one of 16 states without a statewide mask mandate.
These venues remain open subject to restrictions. Venues must ensure 6 feet of social distancing. Bars can have 35%of fire safety capacity or 50 people, whichever is greater.
No occupancy limit other than diners must be 6 feet apart.
Social gatherings limited to 50 people maintaining social distancing.
NOTE: THE TASK FORCE DEFINES RED ZONES AS AREAS WITH WEEKLY REPORTED CASES ABOVE 100 PER 100,000 PEOPLE AND A POSITIVE TEST RESULT GREATER THAN 10% FOR THE POPULATION; 109 COUNTIES AND 34 METRO AREAS IN GEORGIA MEET THAT DEFINITION.
SOUR
For daily statewide updates, go to ajc.com/cvupdate
MORE DETAILS Listed below are the White House Coronavirus Task Force's top five recommendations to contain "widespread and expanding community viral spread"in Georgia.
TASK FORCE RECOMMENDATION
Ensure access to rapid testing at nursing homes, assisted living and long-term care homes.Ensure universal social distancing and face mask use at facilities.Conduct infection control surveys at nursing homes with more than three cases in three weeks.
Implement a statewide mask mandate.
Close bars, nightclubs, entertainment venues and other establishments where social distancing cannot occur in red zone counties.
Limit indoor dining to under 25%occupancy; expand outdoor dining.
Limit social gatherings to 10 or fewer people. CURRENT GEORGIA POLICY
All facilities do not have access to rapid testing. Social distancing is required of all Georgians; mask use is encouraged but not required. Georgia was among the last states to complete required infection control surveys byJuly 31. The Department of Community Health said it is conducting surveys that will meet or exceed this standard for nursing homes.
Georgia is one of 16 states without a statewide mask mandate.
These venues remain open subject to restrictions. Venues must ensure 6 feet of social distancing. Bars can have 35%of fire safety capacity or 50 people, whichever is greater.
No occupancy limit other than diners must be 6 feet apart.
Social gatherings limited to 50 people maintaining social distancing.
NOTE: THE TASK FORCE DEFINES RED ZONES AS AREAS WITH WEEKLY REPORTED CASES ABOVE 100 PER 100,000 PEOPLE AND A POSITIVE TEST RESULT GREATER THAN 10% FOR THE POPULATION; 109 COUNTIES AND 34 METRO AREAS IN GEORGIA MEET THAT DEFINITION.
SOUR
 Load-Date: August 14, 2020

 

End of Document


FALCONS HOMETOWN TEAM. HOMETOWN COVERAGE.; ; NFL, union try to iron out plans for camp
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 19, 2020 Sunday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2020 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: SPORTS; Pg. 7C
Length: 1230 words
Byline: D. Orlando Ledbetter  Staff
Body




Falcons coach Dan Quinn will get the rookies into training camp Tuesday before the veterans arrive July 28.
Quarterbacks and injured players are to report Thursday, according to a memo sent to teams Saturday.
However, the NFL and the NFLPA, the player's union, are in bumpy talks to iron out the return to work protocols and plans for the exhibition season. There have been four conference calls over the past few weeks. The NFLPA had a call Thursday night with team doctors from teams in coronavirus "hot spots" such as Texas, Arizona and Florida.
"We've been serious and a little bit hard-nosed with the league about making sure that all of our partners out there in the world who try to do the best by a group of people need to be heard," NFLPA executive director DeMaurice Smith said Friday. "As we are going forward, we certainly understand that given where we are, we've got to figure out the right balance about things."
Houston and Kansas City told their rookies to report Monday.
"We have players, as we've spoken to our membership, who are nervous about flying from a relative safe location directly into a hot spot with their families, their kids and their wives," NFLPA President JC Tretter said. "That's a major concern with stuff going on in Houston and Miami. How safe is that? Our job is to hold the NFL accountable and have them answer those questions."
There's hope both sides will work out the details and get on to a season with reduced capacities in most NFL venues.
"I don't see the season shutting down," said Dr. Rand McClain, a leader in the regenerative and sports medicine fields. "I don't see there being an issue for the NFL. There really shouldn't be an issue for any of these leagues unless they are really dropping the ball. I'm not blaming just the league, but the players have to drop the ball, too, for it to fall apart."
The NFL is watching closely as Major League Baseball, the NBA and MLS return to playing.
"The NFL is in a great position because they have time to learn from the other league's mistakes," said McClain, co-founder and chief medical officer of LCR Health in Santa Monica, California.He pointed to the NBA making sure to test or screen the drivers of the team vans inside the bubble in Orlando.
Tretter, and high-profile members such as Houston defensive end J.J. Watt and San Francisco cornerback Richard Sherman, have been vocalabouttheslowprogress.
"Our normal return date for training camp is quickly approaching, and we are still far from back to 'normal,'" Tretter wrote in an NFLPA letter. "Our main concern is player safety, both in regard to preventing the virus' transmission as well as preventing injuries after an extended and historically unique layoff."
Falcons player rep Josh Harris said the main issue
is player safety.
"A lot of things that need to be taken care of, especially on the testing front, before we can really move forward," Harris said. "The good news is that it has been progressing and hopefully soon we'll be able to start reporting and be able to go through the processes that have been laid out by health and safety guidelines to safely return back to work."
There isn't going to be a return to normalcy this season.
"We're not going to make it 100% safe," McClain said. "The sport itself is not 100% safe, but we do the best that we can to mitigate the risk of a concussion, a broken neck, that sort of thing.
"What we are trying to do here, no one is saying that we can eliminate the risk of coronavirus, but we are trying to mitigate the risk as much as possible. Hence, the regular testing."
But how much testing? The players, reportedly, want daily testing, while the teams want to test periodically.
"Assuming everyone is following the social distancing and the mask wearing guidelines etc., outside of the game and outside of scrimmage and camp and what not, then when they do enter the game where there is obviously contact, that they have already been screened, they shouldn't be carrying the virus and there shouldn't be a problem," McClain said. "That's the whole idea here."
A total of 72 players have tested positive for COVID-19 over the offseason, according to the NFLPA. With all teams at or near the 90-man roster limit, there are 2,880 player slots in the league, with 2.5% having tested positive.
There likely will be more positive tests upon the players return. The teams will have to test all of the them.
"When we see the initial spike in cases, when guys enter camp, that's expected," McClain said. "That's where we've drawn the line. That's where the entrance is if you will. ... That's the whole purpose of the testing, to (screen) out these guys that are already infected."
After the initial screenings, the players will need to follow the protocols. Testing every day is aggressive.
"I think every other day is adequate," McClain said. "I think that's pretty aggressive. I think every day, I don't know why you need to push the limits. If they are just doing one test or the other, the serological vs. the molecular test, or are they testing for antibodies or testing the virus itself? You are still talking about $100 to $200 a day maximum (per test), which isn't chump change. That's a lot of cold beer."
New England Patriots quarterback Cam Newton and Falcons running back Todd Gurley were interviewed by former New York Giants wide receiver Victor Cruz on Odell Beckham's YouTube channel last week. Both expressed concern about the coming season.
"We want to live this normal life again, but it's invisible," Newton said of the coronavirus. "You don't know if it's here. You don't know if I got it. You don't know if you got it. If the cameraman's got it. That's the scariest thing. ... For us, our sport, you pass DNA off."
Gurley, the former Georgia standout who was signed as a free agent this offseason, is bracing for a bizarre return.
"(Football) is going to take care of itself," Gurley said. "I've been balling my whole life. That's what I do. As long as I (can) be consistent and put in the work every day, then I know what's going to happen on that field."
Gurley noted that while he understands playing without fans, playing games without them would be different.
"It's an unfortunate situation that you just have to come to an agreement with yourself and understand that this is what it is," Gurley said.
The NFLPA agreed to a new collective bargaining agreement with the league in March and offseason protocols for workouts and the coaches and limited staff to return to offices.
"How safe is it to start back up a football season at this moment with locations in this country where teams are located going through giants spikes of this virus," Tretter said. "That has to be something that is looked at as we make any decision. The health-and-safety aspect has to be taken care of for the players."
Getting to camp and pulling off this season figures to be more problematic.
"We don't want to merely return to work and have the season shut down before we even get started," Tretter wrote. "The NFLPA will do its part to advocate for player safety. We will continue to hold the NFL accountable and demand that the league use data, science and the recommendations of its own medical experts to make decisions.
"It has been clear for months that we need to find a way to fit football inside the world of coronavirus. Making decisions outside that lens is both dangerous and irresponsible."
 Load-Date: July 19, 2020

 

End of Document


AJC TOP STORY: CORONAVIRUS OUTBREAK STATE PROJECTIONS; ; Cases, deaths projected to rise as state reopens
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 7, 2020 Thursday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2020 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1128 words
Byline: Willoughby Mariano  Staff
Highlight: Models vary, but news is bleak as Georgians begin to move about.  
Body




Now that Georgia is reopening, teams of experts are calculating whether the rate at which people will sicken or die from the novel coronavirus will rise in the coming weeks, and whether we'll need more hospital beds to care for them.
The news is generally bleak. Revised projections show that unless people act as if they remain on lockdown, infections and deaths by COVID-19 are bound to rise. The only disagreement among experts is by how much and when.
Even a small bump in how much Georgians move about their communities could cause the state's death toll to tick upwards.A new projection by the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, a model favored by the White House, assumes many Georgians will stay at home and summer heat will suppress the virus. Still, IHME revised its cumulative death toll figures upwards to nearly 5,000 by August, an increase of more than 140% percent.
Other models show that if Georgians return closer to their pre-pandemic ways, the state could experience a devastating, exponential spike of infection similar to those in hard-hit areas such as New York City. One created through a collaboration between Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Georgia Tech and Boston Medical Center projects that if restrictions end, cumulative deaths will most likely creep up through July, then skyrocket well beyond 10,000 the next month -- even if residents keep some of their lockdown practices in place.
Cellphone and other data, however, already show that Georgians have begun to travel more often.
The Georgia Department of Public Health is preparing for different scenarios by working with modelers from Georgia Tech, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, IMHE, and the University of Pennsylvania to project local health care needs, a spokeswoman said. It plans to share the results with hospitals and local health agencies.
But even top experts have not rehearsed this kind of crisis, said University of Texas at Austin Professor Lauren Ancel Meyers, who researches ways to project the spread of disease using data science and statistics.
"We did not have a play book for this," Meyers said.
On Wednesday, DPH logged 898 new confirmed COVID-19 cases and 23 new deaths.
Sheltering worked, experts say
Projections for the spread of the novel coronavirus vary and there is great uncertainty in each of them. But the researchers who made them agree that sheltering in place worked for Georgia. The spread of the disease slowed.
What epidemiologists call the reproduction number, or "R," sank to about 1, according to estimates from a Columbia University team; the collaboration involving Georgia Tech; and IHME.
This means that towards the end of the state's lockdown, each person who contracted the virus spread it to about one other person -- a key threshold for containing it.
If R remains even slightly above 1, the disease can overrun a health care system over the course of several months. If it remains at 1 it never goes away. If it dips below 1, the number of new cases is shrinking and the disease can be stopped.
"It was a clear indication it was working, that sheltering in place was the right decision," said Turgay Ayer, a Georgia Tech professor and expert on healthcare analytics who was part of the Tech collaboration.
Experts in infectious disease agree that the further below 1 that R drops, the easier it is to keep a disease in check. If a state has only a handful of new cases per day, it can find the manpower and supplies to isolate each infected person and test their contacts.
This approach worked so well in South Korea that the country of more than 51 million put the novel coronavirus in check while businesses remained open, observed Columbia University Professor Jeffrey Shaman, an expert in infectious disease projections who is with that college's team of COVID-19 modelers.
One reason South Korea's approach is so powerful is that it identifies and isolates people who are infected before they show symptoms, keeping them from unwittingly spreading the virus.
"They've really throttled the disease," he said.
A lag before a surge Had sheltering restrictions continued in Georgia, the number of new infections would have likely gone into decline. Public health experts recommend reopening when R is well below 1-- perhaps at 0.5 or below -- so that decision makers have a better shot at detecting whether relaxing restrictions is increasing the spread of the disease before it spreads out of control.
Rather than wait, Georgia began to reopen.
"Relaxing the measures at that level -- that's premature," said Ali Mokdad, a professor at the University of Washington's IHME. "That leads to continued circulation of the virus."
Those working to control the spread of the disease are now in a bind, said Shaman. Test results cannot tell public health officials if cases are rising or falling in the present moment. It can take a week or more between when a person is infected, begins to infect others, shows symptoms, undergoes testing and gets the results.
This means that any spike in the spread of the disease will only show up in Georgia's case tracking data a week or two after it is underway, which may be too late. In the New York metro area, cases spiked from below 200 to more than 50,000 in less than 20 days.
"For two weeks you'll have no indication that cases are rising again. You won't know it," Shaman said.
The model by Shaman's team shows that Georgia infections will begin to accelerate towards the end of this month, while most states that continue restrictions such as Michigan will experience a drop. Preventing the worst
What leaders must do now is to heed the models, experts said. None can predict the future, and there is great uncertainty in their projections. But they can help leaders prevent the worst from happening, and prepare them for the likely consequences of their policies.
As Georgia opens up, disease modelers recommend building up contact tracing and isolation efforts, which the state is doing currently.
University of Texas' Myers added that states should boost efforts to protect vulnerable seniors in nursing homes and elsewhere.
People who must continue to work can receive paid sick days so they don't stay at work and spread the disease. Local leaders can stay in daily contact with researchers as they do in Austin, learning what measures to track and how to turn them into effective policy.
IHME's Mokdad said the medical system must be prepared for a second wave of the novel coronavirus, which he predicts will take place during flu season. Workers at chicken processing plants and other key points in Georgia's food production system should also be protected.
"You don't want to add on top of COVID-19 high prices and a shortage of food. That would be a disaster," Mokdad said.
 Load-Date: May 7, 2020

 

End of Document


; ; READERS WRITE
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 7, 2020 Thursday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2020 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: NEWS; Pg. 11A
Length: 604 words
Byline: Staff
Body




Trust Kemp, businesses on reopening Georgia
"God bless Brian Kemp!" That's what Rush Limbaugh said. I agree. Somebody had to start to get people back to work. Somebody had to be brave and show leadership based on data, science and professional health care advice. Millions of Georgians are laid off or cut back, and hundreds of thousands of businesses are at risk of complete and permanent failure. As a former president of the state Senate, I've seen a recession. It is not pretty. Yes, the virus is still out there, and people are at risk. But after three months, we know what to do and what not to do. Gov. Kemp, to his credit, did not mandate that businesses open, nor that we, as consumers, patronize them. Kemp is trusting business owners who decide to open to do it right, and he trusts us, as consumers, to make a careful analysis of the businesses we need to use. Our governor trusts us, and we should trust him.
ERIC JOHNSON, GUYTON
Decision to reopen state medically inappropriate
As a pediatrician since 1974, I need to emphasize the inappropriateness of the easing of coronavirus isolation and distancing regulations by Gov. Brian Kemp. This would prove catastrophic to health in all parts of our state, rural and urban, and for all populations - not just our older sisters and brothers, but other adults and children. No scientifically derived expectation of any safety attaches to such a change in policy, especially with the coronavirus epidemic still increasing in new cases and deaths within our state. This change of policy will jeopardize children and their families and is without merit from any perspective. Although it is obvious economic pressures are helping to urge an easing of these precautions, when viewed objectively, our national economy remains overall our healthy ally in nullifying them. Finally, when physicians graduate from medical school, they must promise to do no harm, the opposite of lifting coronavirus precautions in Georgia at this time.
DR.JOHN S. O'SHEA, BOARD CHAIR, GEORGIA RURAL HEALTH CONNECTION
(Box)
Letters to the editor must be no longer than 150 words and must include a daytime phone number forverification.Letters will be edited for length and clarity and may be published in both print and digital formats.Emailed submissions are strongly preferred. Please email to: letters@ajc.com
About the Opinion page: The AJC recognizes the diversity and differences of opinion among our readership, and we strive to accommodate this reality by offering conservative and liberal opinion voices.And we recognize the variety of opinions even within the same side of the political aisle, and hope you do too.For example, some of our liberal writers have been critical of former President Barack Obama--much as some of our conservative columnists have criticized President Donald Trump, while others generally support him.We're continually looking at how best to bring you that breadth of opinion and balance left and right, in print and online.
About the Opinion page: The AJC recognizes the diversity and differences of opinion among our readership, and we strive to accommodate this reality by offering conservative and liberal opinion voices.And we recognize the variety of opinions even within the same side of the political aisle, and hope you do too.For example, some of our liberal writers have been critical of former President Barack Obama--much as some of our conservative columnists have criticized President Donald Trump, while others generally support him.We're continually looking at how best to bring you that breadth of opinion and balance left and right, in print and online.
 Load-Date: May 7, 2020

 

End of Document


AJC TOP STORY: CORONAVIRUS OUTBREAK AROUND THE STATE; ; Faulty data clouds severity of outbreak
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
April 15, 2020 Wednesday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2020 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1096 words
Byline: Alan Judd and Carrie Teegardin  Staff
Highlight: 'It's hard to say what the trends are,' health commissioner says.  
Body




Georgia's public health agency countsjustoneconfirmeddiagnosis of the novel coronavirus--and only one death -- at an Augusta nursing home.
Windermere Health and Rehabilitation Center, however, acknowledges a much grimmer toll. The facility says 74 residents and 20 staff members have tested positive for the virus -- and four residents have died.
The state says the coronavirus has killed no residents of Arbor Terrace at Cascade, an assisted living center in Atlanta. In fact, the Fulton County Board of Health said, deaths at the facility rose Tuesday to 15.
These discrepancies reflect the out-of-date, incompleteandsometimes inaccurate data that guides Georgia's official response to the coronavirus outbreak, which has killed at least 524 people and sickened more than 14,000 others.
The result is an unclear picture of the virus' severity in Georgia, as well as of its likely trajectory. It's not just that officials have no playbook for handling the pandemic, as Gov. Brian Kemp often says. It's that they cannot see the full field of play.
"As an epidemiologist, what I struggle with is...recognizing that our data is not as accurate as it needs to be,"said
Dr.Kathleen Toomey, the state's public
healthcommissioner. "It'shard to say what the trends are."
Thisacknowledgmentcomes as Georgia crossed a threshold, recording its 500th death in just a month from COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus.
Inanaveragemonth, according to federal data, 335 Georgians die in accidents, 135 in shootings and 128 in drug overdoses.Already, thecoronavirus is outpacing every other cause of death except for heart disease and cancer.
The official count of coronavirus deaths increased by 44 since Monday, while nearly 1,000 more diagnoses were
confirmedby laboratory tests. Almost 3,000 people with confirmed cases of the virus are in Georgia hospitals.
Since the outbreak began, Kemp has repeatedly said that data, science and the advice of health officials drive his decision making, including his delays in imposing statewide social-distancing measures to contain the virus' spread. He was among the last of the nation's governors to issue a shelter-at-home order and restrict business activity.
In a news conference Monday, Kemp praised Toomey, saying she "has worked hard to make sure that when we put information out that it's verified and it's correct."
However, "there's no doubt that we need and continue to work on getting better data," Kemp said. The state Department of Public Health cannot identify the race of more than half of the Georgians who have tested positive for the virus, a key data point for understanding the effects on minority communities.
"That data is important to us," Kemp said. "It's also concerning, and we continue to work on that."
In some instances, flawed datahascausedadrasticunderstatement of the virus'severity.
OfficialsonTuesdayreleased areportonlongtermcarefacilitiesthatwasriddledwitherrors andomissions.The report documented outbreaks in 138 facilities, up from 80 last week.But
it made no mention of Summerset Assisted Living in Fulton County, for instance, even though two-thirds of residents and staff there have tested positive for the virus.
The report said at least 89 residentsoflongtermcarefacilities have died of COVID-19.But some of the facilities themselves have recorded significantly more deaths.
One of those is the Joe-Anne Burgin Nursing Home in Cuthbert, a small town in southwestGeorgia.Thehome'schief executive, Kim Gilman, said in a statement that 10 residents died after testing positive for the coronavirus-- not four, as the state reported. Cuthbert is the seat of Randolph County, where more than 1.5% of residents have tested positive for the coronavirus, the highest rate in Georgia.
Tuesday's report also exaggerated the outbreak in at least one facility. It said 47 residents of Cumming Health and Rehab in Forsyth County had tested positive for COVID-19.But Jerry Patton, the facility's administrator, said Tuesday that the disease has been confirmed in only eight patients.
Thenumbermightbehigher if the facility could test all its residents. But, in the absence of adequate testing, the staff is treating all residents as if they havethevirus, Pattonsaid, hoping to limit its spread.
Such inaccurate information only adds to the anxiety felt by families of residents in long-term care facilities.
Nancy Nydam, a spokeswoman for the state public health agency, said flawed data has not prevented officials from ensuring that longterm care facilities are following strict guidelines to prevent the coronavirus from spreading. Troops from the Georgia National Guard have sanitized 229 facilities--including nursing homes, personal care homes and hospices -- in the past two weeks.
"We are not depending on numbers on a spreadsheet to determine how we respond to outbreaks of COVID-19 in longterm care facilities," Nydam said. Toomey said her agency is adding data to its public website so Georgians can visualize the virus' impact.
"You'll see more and more on our website," she said, including maps of the rate of infection and the rate of death in all of Georgia's 159 counties. "It enhances the picture that we have statewide.Looking at where the cases are occurring by number doesn't give you the full picture as looking at the map with rates."
Toomey acknowledged her agency's data isn't always up to date. Before a diagnosis or a death can be reported to the public, information from local health officials, must be vetted.
"I want to be epidemiologically accurate," she said, "but I also want to be as transparent as we possibly can be at this time."
StaffwriterJeremy Redmon contributed reporting.
(Box)
Age group Deaths
0-19 0
20-29 4
30-39 12
40-49 19
50-59 41
60-69 122
70-79 125
80-89 128
90+ 46
Note: Based on Georgia Department of Public Health's noon Tuesday update.Ages for four of the deceased were not available. 74 IS MEDIAN AGE OF GEORGIA VICTIMS
The median age of Georgians who have died from the coronavirus is 74, and more than four-fifths of the fatalities have been among people 60 or older, an analysis of state data shows.Here are the number of deaths by age group:
0-19 0
20-29 4
30-39 12
40-49 19
50-59 41
60-69 122
70-79 125
80-89 128
90+ 46
Note: Based on Georgia Department of Public Health's noon Tuesday update.Ages for four of the deceased were not available. 74 IS MEDIAN AGE OF GEORGIA VICTIMS
The median age of Georgians who have died from the coronavirus is 74, and more than four-fifths of the fatalities have been among people 60 or older, an analysis of state data shows.Here are the number of deaths by age group:
 Load-Date: April 15, 2020

 

End of Document


AROUND GEORGIA; ; Sharp rise in deaths, illnesses predicted
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
April 7, 2020 Tuesday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2020 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1007 words
Byline: Alan Judd and Greg Bluestein  Staff
Body




Georgia is entering a potentially devastating phase of the coronavirus outbreak, as scientific models predict a sharp surge in illnesses and deaths in the next two weeks.
On Monday alone, officials confirmed 75 new deaths from the virus. A week earlier, fatalities in Georgia totaled just 100.
Projections for 1,500 additional deaths in Georgia by April 21 reflect a somber prognosis by the U.S. surgeon general.On Sunday, Dr. Jerome Adams likened the coming days to Pearl Harbor and the Sept. 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, two pivotal events in American history.
State officials, however, continued to send conflicting messages amid unsettling news about the virus' spread. While a spokeswoman for Gov. Brian Kemp vowed "no exceptions" for anyone who violates a statewide shelter-at-home order, the governor's top aide struck a surprisingly upbeat tone on social media.
"Georgia--go to the beach, lake or a state park!" Kemp's chief of staff, Tim Fleming, wrote on Facebook.A week earlier, Fleming had criticized the "overreach" of local officials who imposed social-distancing measures -- days before Kemp's statewide order superseded those measures.
Kemp is expected this week to extend a public health emergency, first declared on March 14, which would allow him to prolong the shelter-at-home mandate.On Monday, Georgia Supreme Court Chief
Justice Harold Melton extended a statewide judicial emergency to May 13, limiting court business to essential matters, such as bond hearings, restraining orders in domestic violence cases, and arrest warrants.
Three days after the statewide lockdown took effect, the number of confirmed coronavirus diagnoses and deaths grew at a staggering pace.
State public health officials said more than 7,500 Georgians have tested positive for COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus. There were about 3,000 cases a week ago.
The official death count rose to 294, up by 75 since Sunday and by roughly 200 from a week ago.
Even with this surge, officials acknowledge the figures lag behind real-time reports from around the state, especially from areas with concentrated outbreaks. The state has tested only the sickest patients, meaning that untold numbers of cases involving milder symptoms have gone uncounted.
The state Department of Public Health reports deaths only after laboratory tests confirm the diagnosis, said Nancy Nydam, the agency's spokeswoman. The department collects reports from hospitals, coroners and medical examiners, and pulls data from death certificates, Nydam said.
"With the current workload on any/all of those, there can be -- and is -- a lag in reporting," Nydam wrote in an email Monday.
For instance, the state on Monday reported 44 deaths in southwest Georgia's Dougherty County, the site of a concentrated outbreak. But Coroner Michael Fowler said the county's death toll reached 50 over the weekend.
State data shows another 36 deaths in the six sparsely populated counties that surround Dougherty, although local officials say the real figure is higher. On Monday, the number of confirmed deaths in Mitchell County, population 22,000, grew from one to 10.
Computer models updated over the weekend suggest that deaths across Georgia will increase rapidly in the coming days.
One of the most widely cited -- and most conservative --models, by the University of Washington's Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, predicts that Georgia's daily death toll will peak with 137 fatalities on April 21. An earlier estimate, prepared before Georgia's shelter-at-home order took effect, showed a peak of 96 deaths on April 25.
Within two weeks, the model suggests, about 1,500 additional Georgians will die from the virus. Deaths will continue well into May, this prediction estimates, on the way to a total of more than 3,400. That is almost 200 more than shown in earlier models.
Other models suggest Georgia deaths could have reached the tens of thousands without the kind of social distancing many residents have practiced for the past few weeks.
Still, "there may be more risk in some states like Texas and Georgia than models currently predict," Dr. Scott Gottlieb, a former commissioner of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, wrote Monday on Twitter. "That may in part flow from the fact that those states are among the worst in testing."
The number of Georgians tested for COVID-19 doubled in the past week, to more than 40,000.
As the bad news continued Monday, some Republican officials defended Kemp against criticism on two fronts: that he waited too long to issue a shelter-at-home order and that, when he did, he wiped out stricter measures already imposed by numerous cities and counties. At least one of Kemp's allies went so far as to question the veracity of government reports on the virus.
Public Service Commissioner Tim Echols sent his supporters a lengthy newsletter assailing the "fake news media" and those he accused of trying to "score cheap political points" off Kemp's performance during a crisis.
"Now is not the time for pandemic politics," Echols wrote. "It's time for Georgians to unite together and support Governor Kemp and his team, who are using data, science and experts to chart a measured path forward."
State Rep. Ron Stephens, R-Savannah, referred to a story on a conservative website that suggested federal experts' predictions about the virus' spread could be "wildly inaccurate." The author once promoted a false conspiracy theory about bombs that a supporter of President Donald Trump admitted to mailing to prominent Democrats and to members of the media.
Still, Stephens said, "Some of us are questioning the models as grossly off."
Another Republican lawmaker, state Rep. Jeff Jones of Brunswick, wrote Kemp over the weekend to call the reopening of beaches against the wishes of local officials "counterintuitive."
"I'm scratching my head after this decision," Jones said in an interview. "Maybe the governor should have sought the opinion of local representatives."
Staff writers Brad Schrade and Bill Rankin contributed to this article.
 Load-Date: April 7, 2020

 

End of Document


ONLY IN THE AJC EDUCATION; ; Even with English, social studies, it's all about data
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
November 11, 2019 Monday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2019 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: METRO; Pg. 1B
Length: 1040 words
Byline: Arlinda Smith Broady  Staff
Highlight: Students use computer science 'to understand the world they live in.'  
Body




Last year 34.5% of the sixth grade class at Sweetwater Middle School scored "proficient" on the end of grade Milestones test for English language arts, and 26.5% scored proficient in math on the same assessment. Principal Jay Nebel wondered if those students could end up in the "distinguished learner" category if they had a different way of learning.
( "Proficient" means the students have a pretty good grasp of the material. "Distinguished" means they've mastered it.)
"A big part of my leadership philosophy is to release the teachers to stay true to the curriculum, but try to engage the students in different ways," he said.
Computer science teacher Shana White aims for that engagement by integrating core subjects -- reading, math, science and social studies -- into one big lesson with computer science as the glue that connects them all.
"We established an academy strategy with the belief that the best students will perform even better," she said, and results so far are promising.
White was recently awarded a fellowship from the national Computer Science Teachers Association in a partnership with Microsoft and Silicon Valley nonprofit Pluralsight One. Although her work at Sweetwater Middle isn't part of that project, it's similar.
"It's still project-based learning where students combine cultural awareness with interdisciplinary lessons in literacy and numeracy," said White.
Lessons have plotted food deserts in the neighborhoods where students live and used state and national data to help students understand how a school-to-prison pipeline exists.
"The students are using data science to understand the world they live in," said White. "Those are things that they are interested in, and with other teachers we collaborate to interconnect learning."
The AJC visited a class when they were studying Native American cultures. The students made bead patterns that combined some of the folklore and history of the tribes as well as mathematical algorithms to construct patterns. Algebraic lessons in ratios and slopes are part of the current curriculum in that area, and figurative language and creative writing are being studied right now in the English language arts class.
Alex Tran and Yhoshua Aleman worked together on a bead pattern that represented strength and vulnerability.
"The heart is broken because the boy in our story has no friends," said Alex. "But here it's fixed when he becomes part of a group and gains friends," said Yhoshua.
Cecilia Ruiz, Katherine Ramos and Keecia Smith discussed the plot points needed for the repeating patterns.
"Once you figure it out, it's really easy," said Katherine.
White's class had 39 students of color and one white student. And as a result of her working to increase girls' participation in computer science, there were 30 girls and 10 boys.
"I'm excited at the progress we've made already," said White. "Interim tests show several students are already on their way to becoming distinguished learners."
Building those skills is another way of teaching the "whole child," said White.
Chris Thompson, associate director of student programs at Georgia Tech's Center for Education Integrating Science, Mathematics and Computing, agrees. He works with organizations that are expanding access to computer science in schools. He said in the not-so-distant future, computer science education will be a foundational skill, just like reading, writing and doing math.
"It leads to computational thinking that allows you to break problems down into components," he said.
While there are varying opinions on which should come first -- the computer science skills or the expertise in a specific area such as engineering or data analysis -- the consensus is that there aren't enough computer science instructors to teach it. "A lot of computer science skills are self taught for that reason," said Thompson.
But the Georgia Legislature is aware of that need and has mandated that computer science be taught in all high schools and middle schools. A bill signed in May by Gov. Brian Kemp allows the courses to be phased in over the next few years. It also gives school districts the authority to decide if those courses will be independent or part of an integrated system.
However it comes about, these skills strengthen local community, national innovation, and opportunities for youth. But only half of one percent of high school students are offered computer science classes, according to Kemp.
Computer science is the basis of most innovation today, yet most schools don't prepare students to innovate and create the new technologies that drive local and national economies. This ability to innovate with technology is also important for students' future success and ability to make a difference in a global society.
"I have 540 days to help these students become better prepared for the rest of their lives," said Sweetwater's Nebel. "If I can't do that, I've failed as a principal."
(Box)
BY THE NUMBERS Computer science in Georgia
17,854 open computing jobs in 2018
$90,913 average salary for computing jobs $47,200 average salary in the state for all jobs 2,279 computer science graduates in 2017;19%were female
52%of all public high schools in the state teach computer science
4,952 exams were taken in AP Computer Science by high school students in Georgia in 2018
27%of high school AP exam takers were female
499 high school AP exams were taken by Hispanic or Latino students
503 high school AP exams were taken by African American students 177 schools in Georgia (28%of Ga. schools with AP programs) offered an AP Computer Science course in 2017-2018 SOURCE: CODE.ORG
17,854 open computing jobs in 2018
$90,913 average salary for computing jobs $47,200 average salary in the state for all jobs 2,279 computer science graduates in 2017;19%were female
52%of all public high schools in the state teach computer science
4,952 exams were taken in AP Computer Science by high school students in Georgia in 2018
27%of high school AP exam takers were female
499 high school AP exams were taken by Hispanic or Latino students
503 high school AP exams were taken by African American students 177 schools in Georgia (28%of Ga. schools with AP programs) offered an AP Computer Science course in 2017-2018 SOURCE: CODE.ORG
 Load-Date: November 11, 2019

 

End of Document


GEORGIA STATE; Officials unveil $20 million financial technology academy at Georgia State
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
September 12, 2018 Wednesday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2018 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: METRO; Pg. 8B
Length: 494 words
Byline: Eric Stirgus  Staff
Body




University System of Georgia officials announced Tuesday they're starting a hub at Georgia State University's Robinson College of Business for all 26 colleges and universities in the system to learn and train more students for careers in the financial technology industry, saying there's a labor gap in the state.
The initiative, FinTech Academy, will be a public-private partnership with businesses that will cost about $20 million over the next three years. University System officials said they'll reallocate some funds for the effort. One company, FIS, a banking software and services company located in more than 100 countries, announced Tuesday it's committing $1 million to the academy.
Financial technology is said to be thriving in metro Atlanta, but more workers are needed. By 2020, the region will need an additional 5,000 fintech professionals, particularly in software development and data science, local experts say.
"We're in a talent war, and we need fintech talent," Denise Williams, chief people officer at FIS, said at Tuesday's state Board of Regents meeting.
Local businesses will help fund the training and offer apprenticeships and internships, said Art Recesso, the University System's ecampus chief innovation officer. The first two companies to sign up are FIS and InComm, a Georgia-based retail and comsumer payment technology company.
Certificates and degrees will be offered through classes on various University
" System campuses and online. There are few fintech classes in the system, but officials say that will change. Six University System institutions will offer fintech-related courses this year. Jim Senn, the academy's founding director, conservatively estimates about 250 students will take fintech courses this year.
University System officials say they graduate about 5,000 students a year in fintech-related fields, but Recesso told the board industry companies "don't access this yet, and that's what we're trying to change."
Georgia State was chosen as the academy's center, in part because of its proximity to several fintech companies. The university started a fintech lab last year, another factor in the decision to put the academy there.
Recesso said the idea for the academy came from a 2014 state report on
high-demand careers and a 18-month
study of the fintech industry. Georgia State and University System officials were excited about the possibilities and challenges of this new campaign.
"This is uncharted territory for all of us," said Richard D. Phillips, dean of Georgia State's College of Business.
(Box)
MORE DETAILS " What is fintech?
|FinTech, financial technology, helps process retail banking, gift-card transactions and personal investments. |Atlanta fintech companies process 70 percent of all credit, debit and prepaid card transactions in the United States, equating to more than $3.5 trillion annually, according to some estimates.
|About 105,000 people worldwide are working at Georgia-based fintech companies.
 Load-Date: September 12, 2018

 

End of Document


NEWSMAKERS
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 7, 2018 Sunday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2018 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 2D
Length: 202 words
Byline: Staff
Body




|The Georgia Research Alliance has named Russell Allen as the organization's new president and CEO.
|The NRP Group, a developer, builder and manager of multifamily housing, has hired Johnson Bazzel as vice president of development, marking NRP's entrance into the Atlanta market.
|JE Dunn Construction has hired industry veteran Marty Laskey as director of safety for the company's East Region.
|Brightlink, a
communications platform and technology company that delivers voice,
messaging, analytics and cloud-based solutions, has named Rob Chen as CEO.
|G&L Holdings Inc., the holding company of food ingredient
manufacturers Grain Craft and Southeastern Mills, has appointed Rhonda Jordan, Steve Dunphy and Rick Strait as independent directors.
|Vince Calhoun, an expert in brain imaging and analysis, has been named the founding director of the Center for Translational Research in Neuroimaging and Data Science at Georgia State University.
|Asset TV, a global online video platform for investment professionals, has hired business
journalist Laura J. Keller to lead its editorial coverage.
|The Stuart A. Rose Manuscript, Archives, and Rare Book Library at Emory University has named Jennifer Gunter King as its new director.
 Load-Date: October 7, 2018

 

End of Document


NEWSMAKERS
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 28, 2018 Sunday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2018 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 2D
Length: 219 words
Byline: to ,  Staff
Body




|Alex Gonzalez has been named chief innovation officer for the Metro Atlanta Chamber. In this newly created role, Gonzalez will lead the chamber's work to accelerate metro Atlanta's innovation ecosystem and serve as an ambassador for the region's innovation brand locally and nationally.
|Pharma Tech Industries, one of the largest
pharmaceutical contract manufacturers and packagers of powder products in the world, has promoted Patty Giebink to business development manager on its commercial development team.
|Dorian Denburg and Kevin Pranoto have been named board members of Second Helpings Atlanta.
|Elemica, a leading digital supply network for process manufacturing industries, has promoted Rich Katz, CTO, to president of the company. Arun Samuga has been promoted into the chief technology officer position. |FusionHealth, a population health management solution focused on delivering effective treatment for sleep problems at scale, has appointed Mackenzie Hamilton as its client
success manager for national accounts.
|Vince Calhoun, an expert in brain imaging and analysis, has been named the founding director of the Center for Translational Research in Neuroimaging and Data Science at Georgia State University.
Please send announcements of promotions and new hires
along with color head shots in jpg format.
 Load-Date: October 28, 2018

 

End of Document


REAL ESTATE; Study: Flooding cut coastal Georgia homes' value
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
August 29, 2018 Wednesday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2018 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: METRO; Pg. 8B
Length: 369 words
Byline: Maya T.Prabhu  Staff
Body




Coastal Georgia homes have lost nearly $15.3 million in value since 2005 due to flooding, according to a recent study.
The First Street Foundation, a nonprofit group concerned about the rise in sea levels, found there was a loss of $7.4 billion in home value across five coastal states between 2005 and 2017.
Scientists with the nonprofit analyzed more than 5.5 million real estate transactions in Georgia, Florida, North Carolina, South Carolina and Virginia, according to the study.
When determining losses, researchers tried to pinpoint the impact of frequent tidal flooding, according to the study's methodology.
Homeowners in Florida suffered the highest losses in the five states studied, dropping nearly $5.4 billion since 2005. Losses in Georgia were far lower than in the other states.
Analysis found that properties in four coastal Georgia locations -- Savannah, Skidaway Island, St. Marys and Wilmington Island -- each lost more than $1 million in value. Tybee Island homes reportedly lost $2.6 million in property value.
"It is one thing to project what the future impacts of sea level rise could be, but it is quite another to know that the market has already responded negatively to this threat," Steven A.McAlpine, the head of data science at the First Street Foundation, said in a news release.
Researchers say this is the first study to demonstrate that sea level rise is directly to blame for decreased coastal home value and the first to identify the role nearby flooding plays in that decrease.
According to FloodIQ.com, a prediction tool created by the First Street Foundation, sea levels are estimated to rise 5.9 inches in coastal Georgia in the next 15 years.
Megan Desrosiers, the president and CEO of the Georgia conservation group One Hundred Miles, said the study shows that communities need to work together to address sea level rise. Desrosiers said cities can construct elevated roads or purchase wetlands to help contain rainwater.
"People need to start working with local government officials and talk about investing in infrastructure and adopting policies that keep existing residents out of harm's way and make sure future residents aren't building in areas that are in harm's way," she said.
 Load-Date: August 29, 2018

 

End of Document


GEORGIA SUPREME COURT; Payday lending group loses lawsuit over record release
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
June 19, 2018 Tuesday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2018 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
 
Section: METRO; Pg. 3B
Length: 518 words
Byline: Bill Rankin  Staff
Body




The Georgia Supreme Court on Monday ruled that correspondence between a Kennesaw State University professor and a payday lending organization she conducted a study for is subject to disclosure under the state's open records laws.
The ruling, hailed by open government advocates, means that Campaign for Accountability, a Washington-based watchdog group, can obtain communications between Kennesaw State statistics and data science professor Jennifer Lewis Priestly and the Consumer Credit Research Foundation, which touts studies favorable to payday lending.
Campaign for Accountability had filed requests under the state's Open Records Act after Priestly published an article about a study she did for Consumer Credit Research Foundation in 2014. The foundation gave her a $30,000 grant for the work.
When the university system agreed to turn over the correspondence, the Consumer Credit Research Foundation filed suit to block it.
Last year, the Court of Appeals ruled in the foundation's favor, but the Supreme Court unanimously overturned that decision.
"This is a great win for anyone who believes in the importance of open and transparent government," said Atlanta lawyer Henry Chalmers, who represents Campaign for Accountability. The nonprofit contends the payday loan industry funds favorable academic studies to boost its bottom line.
If the court had ruled the other way, it could have set a precedent for other cases pertaining to government records. Chalmers said, "it essentially would have pulled the shade down on sunshine into government affairs."
The Consumer Credit Research Foundation argued that the Open Records Act prohibits the release of information that falls within any of the act's 50 exemptions. And it said the information sought by Campaign for Accountability fell within two of those exemptions.
But Justice David Nahmias, writing for the court, said the Open Records Act merely states that a public entity "shall not be required" to release such information. That does not mean "prohibited
Powder Springs, Marietta and more can get the latest on Twitter: @cobbnewsnow
from disclosure," he said.
Reading the law as suggested by the Consumer Credit Research Foundation "would be contrary ... to the English language," wrote Nahmias, who offered some hypothetical examples to explain his reasoning.
"Owners of vehicles that are exempt from emissions testing requirements are not prohibited from testing their vehicles' emissions," the opinion said. "If a teacher tells his students that an extra credit assignment is not required, a student who completes the work would be quite annoyed if the teacher rejected it as prohibited."
Atlanta lawyer Tom Clyde, who represents The Atlanta Journal-Constitution and is a board member of the Georgia First Amendment Foundation, praised the ruling.
"The Supreme Court's decision today means governments' hands are not tied when they want to release information to the public," he said. "Unless a law specifically forbids release, government agencies can use their best judgment to keep the public informed. That's the way democracy is supposed to work."
 Load-Date: June 19, 2018

 

End of Document
