

Antonio French: As mass shootings resume, it's time to finally take a data-driven approach
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 26, 2021 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2021 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A11
Length: 860 words
Byline:  By Antonio French St. Louis Post-Dispatch 
Body


As the Biden-Harris administration makes good on its promise to ramp up vaccination efforts, and the budding of lilac bushes marks the beginning of spring and the end of a long, cold winter, Americans are eager to return to a pre-coronavirus normal. And as normal begins to return, so has that most awful American ritual: the mass shooting.
On Monday at a grocery store in Boulder, Colorado, a gunman killed 10 people. Less than a week before near Atlanta, another man shot and killed eight people at area spas. Six of the victims were women of Asian descent. These were just two of at least seven mass shootings that occurred within one week across America. After a year without such high-profile incidents, sadly America is returning to normal.
It appeared that with the pandemic, social distancing, closed schools and curfews came also a break from incidents such as the Sandy Hook school shooting in 2012 that left 28 dead, including 20 children; the Orlando nightclub shooting in 2016 that left 50 people dead; and the Las Vegas shooting in 2017 that left 61 people dead. It seemed that the fear of the virus replaced, if only for a moment, the fear of a loved one being killed randomly by a small man with a big gun. But that calm might not have been based on reality.
While mass shootings are often characterized by a mentally ill lone gunman walking into a public place and firing into a crowd, most mass shootings don't fit that stereotype and are actually even more common than most realize.
The Gun Violence Archive, a nonprofit research group, defines mass shootings as any incident in which four or more people are shot or killed, not including the shooter. Using that definition, mass shootings actually went up during the pandemic. According to Gun Violence Archive, America experienced 611 mass shootings in 2020. That's up significantly from the 419 it recorded in 2019 and the 337 in 2018. Most of these incidents don't make the news, or at least aren't reported as a mass shooting, instead just as a typical act of urban violence.
Gun violence in general went up in 2020. By a lot. According to the gun research group's numbers, 19,380 people died by gun violence in 2020 - not including suicides. That's an increase of more than 25% from the 15,440 deaths in 2019. In the five years prior, non-suicidal gun deaths fluctuated between roughly 12,000 and 15,500 deaths annually, according to the group.
Clearly these numbers represent a crisis. But why am I getting these numbers from a nonprofit who tracks these deaths by monitoring media reports and pulling together public data from law enforcement, government and commercial sources? Why not just get the data from the federal government the same way we do for population numbers or even coronavirus infection and vaccination rates? Because the federal government doesn't track this data. That's right, our government doesn't track data on one of the leading causes of death in America. Why? Because of the National Rifle Association and something called the Dickey Amendment.
Back in 1997, the NRA's man on Capitol Hill, Republican Jay Dickey of Arkansas, added a provision to an appropriations bill signed into law by President Bill Clinton. Dickey's amendment stated that "none of the funds made available for injury prevention and control at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention may be used to advocate or promote gun control." And although that language didn't explicitly ban gun violence research, the $2.6-million budget cut that came with it - the exact amount the CDC had spent on gun violence research the year before - sent a clear message.
Following the recent mass shooting deaths, President Joe Biden is calling on Congress to enact some common sense gun control measures. As a gun owner, I fully support those efforts. It's not unreasonable to expect at least as much regulation to own and operate a gun as we require to own and operate a car. But as Biden and congressional Democrats prepare for another round of battle with Republicans and the NRA about banning assault rifles and closing background check loopholes, Biden should also unleash the power of data and science in this fight.
Allowing the CDC to study this other deadly pandemic that has been with us long before the coronavirus is the right move. Willful ignorance will never get us to a better place, and limiting our country's ability to completely understand the deadly effects of America's gun fetish prevents us from seeing the big picture.
I'm not sure that collecting and analyzing the data will have any immediate effect. If the Sandy Hook massacre of a classroom of children didn't force a reckoning, I'm not sure what will. But the data will fuel thousands of news reports, opinion columns and education efforts, which over time can change perceptions. That, of course, is what Dickey and the NRA were trying to prevent with that awful amendment.
I hope the Biden-Harris administration brings the same pro-science, pro-transparency approach that it has championed in fighting the coronavirus to the pandemic of gun violence. In this fight, knowledge is the vaccine, and we desperately need more of it.

Graphic

 
 Mourners shield the flames of their candles from the wind at a vigil in Boulder, Colo., for the victims of a mass shooting at a grocery store.(AP Photo/David Zalubowski)  Antonio French 

Load-Date: March 26, 2021


End of Document


Letters to the editor, March 14
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 14, 2021 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2021 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A16
Length: 1036 words
Body


Parson, following Trump's map, caused more to die
Regarding "‘Balanced approach': Parson says his coronavirus policies worked; others say more could have been done" (March 10): On March 18, 2020, Gov. Mike Parson announced the first Missouri coronavirus death. Today, there have been more than 8,700 deaths in the state.
What would that number be now if Parson had not followed Donald Trump's blueprint of playing down mask-wearing, discrediting excellent doctors and telling us the virus would magically disappear? We still don't have enough vaccine to get to large, populated areas. Missourians in our larger cities have already trekked miles around the state to get vaccinated. It appears that those in rural areas who voted for Parson received ample vaccine while those in urban areas who mostly didn't vote for him now are traveling all over Missouri to get vaccinated.
Nancy Gates Adams - Florissant
Conservation Commission is OK without being expanded
Regarding "Controversial changes to Conservation Commission approved by House committee" (March 8): Missouri has a distinguished Conservation Commission and is the envy of virtually all other states. The commission's policies are based on intensive research, data and science. Decisions and regulation updates always include input from land owners, farmers, hunters, fishermen and environmentalists, as well as many local jurisdictions and municipalities.
The key to its success was the foresight of Missourians to make this commission independent, not political. Decisions are made for the long-term good of Missouri, not due to political whims and special interest groups. The move by some lawmakers, driven in part by their personal disagreements on minor issues, would undermine the Missouri Department of Conservation's ability to function in the best interests of the state.
It is discouraging enough that the Legislature proposes expanding the commission with an additional six Republicans and two Democrats. So much for a non-partisan commission. We definitely do not want these positions to be elected on a political basis. Missourians need to see through this and protect the integrity of our shining star. We need this commission to stay independent, especially for our children and our grandchildren.
Bruce Norman - Webster Groves
Thousands died because Trump underplayed the virus
In Lynn Schmidt's column, "Seasons of fear, frustration, impatience and appreciation define this pandemic" (March 9), she missed one of the most prevalent emotions experienced by those paying attention: The outrage over Donald Trump and his supporters deliberately lying and underplaying the seriousness of the pandemic, and the need to take appropriate precautions.
Tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of people in this country died as a result of Trump and his co-conspirators' deliberate pandering and abetting ignorance. Blood is on their hands. We should be outraged, and they should all be held accountable.
Robert Barczewski - Ballwin
Allowing guns on MetroLink would not make it safer
Regarding: "Missouri House passes bill to allow guns on public transit" (March 9): The Missouri Public Transit Association and Citizens for Modern Transit do not believe allowing passengers to carry firearms would enhance the safety and security of public transit systems.
The close-quarter transit environment is absolutely unique. There is an unacceptable risk that someone could be harmed if a gun is fired or discharged accidently on transit vehicles. There is no evidence that allowing concealed-carry permit holders to have firearms on transit improves safety and security. And such allowances may serve as a detriment to current ridership.
Much time, effort and progress has been made to address safety and security - and it will remain a top priority. Just as no firearms are allowed onto airplanes or Amtrak, Missouri must keep transit on track by opposing concealed-carry permit holders to lawfully have firearms on public transit.
Kimberly Cella - St. Louis Executive director, Citizens for Modern Transit
Benefits of foreign exchange students are abundant
Regarding "The last foreign exchange student in St. Louis: ‘I didn't consider staying in Barcelona. I need to live this.'" (March 9): My family has hosted students from France who lived with us during my school-aged years. The St. Louis region benefited from these students, as well as those who come here for internships that affords them marketable job skills. They return to their home countries with global experience and a deeper understanding and appreciation of American culture. Host regions also benefit economically from them.
These long-lasting and mutually beneficial relationships should continue. We should all support robust funding for the State Department to further these educational and cultural exchange programs. I look forward to more arriving in the future, bringing the world to St. Louis and sharing their experience of St. Louis.
Amy Morros - St. Louis
Restoring landmark would help rejuvenation project
Regarding "Hubbard, McCormack Baron feud threatens prestigious federal grant" (March 7): In past years, the Landmarks Association of St. Louis has been privileged to make common cause with McCormack Baron on behalf of historic preservation in St. Louis. The redevelopment of the Carr Square neighborhood and, in particular, William B. Ittner's magnificent Carr School, have been on Landmarks Association's wish list for many years. This is because investment in the neighborhood and this iconic building would both strengthen the northern edge of downtown while bridging the gap between the Central Business District and neighborhoods like Old North.
Unfortunately, Carr School has been vacant since the 1980s and was first placed on Landmarks' most endangered buildings list more than two decades ago. As an organization, we would hope that a reconciliation can take place between the various stakeholders that enables the Preservation Square project to go forward and that a way is found to include a restored Carr School in the neighborhood's rejuvenation.
Andrew Weil - St. Louis Executive Director of Landmarks Association of St. Louis
> Read more letters online at STLToday.com/letters

Graphic

 
 Editorial cartoon by John Darkow, Columbia Missourian via CagleCartoons.com - Blunt won't run again / Not Trumpy enough Missouri U.S. Senator Roy Blunt, wearing a giant 'NOT Trumpy Enough' ball and chain, explains: "Sometimes things make it really hard to run again!"   

Load-Date: March 15, 2021


End of Document


Virus tolls similar across the nation despite governors' differing actions
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 14, 2021 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2021 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A23
Length: 896 words
Byline:  By DAVID A. LIEB Associated Press 
Body


Nearly a year after California Gov. Gavin Newsom ordered the nation's first statewide shutdown because of the coronavirus, masks remain mandated, indoor dining and other activities are significantly limited, and Disneyland remains closed.
By contrast, Florida has no statewide restrictions. Republican Gov. Ron DeSantis has prohibited municipalities from fining people who refuse to wear masks. And Disney World has been open since July.
Despite their differing approaches, California and Florida have experienced almost identical outcomes in COVID-19 case rates.
How have two states that took such divergent tacks arrived at similar points?
"This is going to be an important question that we have to ask ourselves: What public health measures actually were the most impactful, and which ones had negligible effect or backfired by driving behavior underground?" said Amesh Adalja, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security.
Though research has found that mask mandates and limits on group activities such as indoor dining can help slow the spread of the coronavirus, states with greater government-imposed restrictions have not always fared better than those without them.
California and Florida both have a COVID-19 case rate of about 8,900 per 100,000 residents since the pandemic began, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. And both rank in the middle among states for COVID-19 death rates - Florida was 27th as of Friday; California was 28th.
Connecticut and South Dakota are another example. Both rank among the 10 worst states for COVID-19 death rates. Yet Connecticut Gov. Ned Lamont, a Democrat, imposed numerous statewide restrictions over the past year after an early surge in deaths, while South Dakota Gov. Kristi Noem, a Republican, issued no mandates as virus deaths soared in the fall.
While Lamont ordered quarantines for certain out-of-state visitors, Noem launched a $5 million tourism advertising campaign and welcomed people to a massive motorcycle rally, which some health experts said spread the coronavirus throughout the Midwest.
Both contend their approach is the best.
"Even in a pandemic, public health policy needs to take into account people's economic and social well-being," Noem said during a recent conservative convention.
Lamont recently announced that he is lifting capacity limits at retail stores, restaurants and other facilities, effective March 19. But bars that don't serve food will remain closed and a mask mandate will continue.
"This is not Texas. This is not Mississippi. This is Connecticut," Lamont said, referencing other states that recently lifted mask mandates.
"We're finding what works is wearing the mask, social distancing and vaccinations," he said.
As new COVID-19 cases decrease nationally, governors in more than half the states have taken actions during past two weeks to end or ease coronavirus restrictions, according to an Associated Press tally. Some capacity limits ended Friday in Maryland and Oklahoma. Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, New York and Wyoming are relaxing restrictions in the coming week.
In almost all cases, governors have lauded their approach to the pandemic, while critics have accused them of being too stringent or too lax.
California's slow reopening is expected to gain steam in April. But Republicans in California are helping organize a recall effort against Newsom that has drawn nearly 2 million petition signatures from people frustrated over his long-lasting limits on businesses, church gatherings and people's activities. He also faces intense pressure over public school closures and the glacial pace of getting them reopened.
Newsom asserted that California has been a leader in combating the virus while delivering his State of the State address this past week from Dodger Stadium, where the empty seats roughly equaled the state's 55,000 COVID-19 deaths.
"From the earliest days of this pandemic, California trusted in science and data, and we met the moment," Newsom said.
He added: "We're not going to change course just because of a few naysayers and doomsdayers."
In his own State of the State address, DeSantis asserted that Florida was in better shape than others because its businesses and schools are open. Florida's unemployment rate ranked below the national average, and significantly lower than California's, at the start of this year.
"While so many other states kept locking people down over these many months, Florida lifted people up," DeSantis said.
Public health experts said individual choices could help explain the similar outcomes among some states with loose or strict orders from the governor.
Some people voluntarily were "being more vigilant in states where the guidelines are more relaxed," said Thomas Tsai, an assistant professor at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. Yet in states with more government mandates, "people generally in public were wearing masks and following the guidelines, but in private they were letting down their guard and less vigilant," he said.
Imposing strict measures, like forbidding families from visiting grandparents and friends from gathering, is like taking an abstinence-only approach to combating drug use and sexually transmitted disease, said Adalja, of Johns Hopkins University.
Some will comply. But other "people are going to do those activities, anyway," he said.

Graphic

 
 Charles Perez wears a protective face mask and gloves as he waits on tables June 1, 2020 at the Morada Bay Beach Cafe in Islamorada, in the Florida Keys. Photo by LYNNE SLADKY, ASSOCIATED PRESS  California Gov. Gavin Newsom addresses the media during a visit to a vaccination center Monday in South Gate, Calif. Photo by MARCIO JOSE SANCHEZ, ASSOCIATED PRESS 

Load-Date: March 15, 2021


End of Document


St. Louis Public Library has soft reopening as others plan March returns
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 4, 2021 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2021 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 502 words
Byline:  BY JANE HENDERSON St. Louis Post-Dispatch 
Body


A day after some library branches were used as voting sites, the St. Louis Public Library has quietly reopened to the public.
After months of pandemic-related closure, the library opted for a soft reopening Wednesday so staff could adjust to serving patrons again, director Waller McGuire said.
Other St. Louis-area library systems plan to reopen their doors later this month. The St. Louis County Library is still working on details. It won't announce its reopening date until after a midmonth meeting with its board of trustees, said Kristen Sorth, the library director.
The St. Charles City-County Library is also waiting to announce a date until after a board meeting.
Sorth said these three systems and the Municipal Library Consortium directors have been collaborating on plans and concerns.
The county library has also been in "close contact with county health department, making decisions based on science and data," she said in a phone interview.
Of course most librarians and staff have been working since the pandemic started, but for months that has largely meant curbside pickups and online downloads for patrons. Patrons have not been able to go into most city and county branches since about Thanksgiving, when cases of COVID-19 escalated.
But with cases falling, the library directors now believe it's safe to start offering some limited in-building hours. Reopening dates will be forthcoming.
Over the past year, McGuire said, 11 city library staff members were diagnosed with COVID-19, but contact tracing showed they did not get the virus through work.
The libraries will continue using social-distancing practices, limiting the number of people in buildings and requiring masks. Returned books and other materials are "quarantined" for a time before being put back into circulation.
In St. Louis, the website says that patrons are now allowed in the building for 30 minutes (60 if using a reserved computer).
It also says:
"Hours for in-person service will be 11 a.m.-5 p.m. on Monday and Tuesday, 1-7 p.m. on Wednesday and Thursday, and 11 a.m.-5 p.m. on Friday and Saturday at Baden, Barr, Buder, Cabanne, Carondelet, Carpenter, Central, Charing Cross, Divoll, Julia Davis, Kingshighway, Machacek, Marketplace, Schlafly and Walnut Park. Central Express hours will be 11 a.m.-5 p.m. Monday through Friday.
"In addition to in-building service, Curbside Pickup will continue to be offered at all locations, excluding Charing Cross, Central Express and Marketplace.
"Public restrooms will be open, but water fountains will remain closed. Seating areas and meeting areas will remain closed and all in-person programming remains canceled.
"Both Customers and Staff must wear masks inside the Libraries at all times. This applies to all individuals five (5) years of age and older. Unfortunately, SLPL will have to refuse admittance to anyone not wearing a mask. Masks will be available for those who do not have one. Customers and Staff will also be expected to practice social distancing within the buildings."

Load-Date: March 5, 2021


End of Document


SIUC OFFERS FREE SCIENCE WORKSHOPS FOR TEACHERS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 25, 1993, MONDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: ILLINOIS; Pg. 9
Length: 336 words
Byline: Paula M. Davenport Post-Dispatch Special Correspondent
Body


CARBONDALE, Ill. - Calling all teachers: Learn to make science lively in free winter workshops at Southern Illinois University.
You'll develop science classes incorporating instructional videos, hands-on experiments and lively discussions. Then, you can train peers in your home school districts.
"One of the most compelling things is that teachers will be publishing lessons for science classes taught all over the country," notes Candis S.  Isberner, director of TV Learning Services for SIUC's Broadcasting Service.
Isberner said the project, known formally as the National Teacher Training Institute for Science, Television and Technology, is part of a national push to help teachers hone science skills.
SIUC's sessions will be held at the Touch of Nature Environmental Center on Sunday and Monday, Feb. 28 and March 1. Interested teachers should apply now.  Enrollment is limited. For more information call Isberner at (618) 453-6174.
Workshops will be led by regionally recruited master teachers, including Deb Clinebell, a Waterloo Junior High teacher, and Mary Modene of Belleville, a teacher at Red Bud Elementary School.
Clinebell, Modene and eight others were hand-picked for their expertise in science instruction and innovative use of instructional television.
They'll show teacher colleagues how to blend videos with science discussions. And they've devised engaging experiments to bring science to every desktop.
Studies show that when television is used in science lessons, students learn more, show greater interest and retain more science data.
The educational project was launched in 1990 as a partnership between Texaco and Thirteen/ WNET, a New York public television station. Last year, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting helped expand the effort, and 10 institutes were offered around the country.
This year, 10 additional sites have been chosen. SIUC is the sole site in Illinois.
The university's public television stations, WSIU and WUSI, received a grant to help finance the training, Isberner said.

Load-Date: September 29, 1993


End of Document


Ken Schechtman: Can scientific thinking and progressive activism coexist?
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 3, 2021 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2021 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A9
Length: 861 words
Byline:  By Ken Schechtman 
Body


I inhabit two different sometimes incompatible worlds as an academic scientist and a progressive activist.
In science, logic and the search for alternative explanations transcend opinion and group expectations. When testing a vaccine, you begin by assuming it doesn't work, the null hypothesis in clinical trials lingo. You then challenge that assumption with an experiment that tests whether the evidence justifies claiming effectiveness.
Without supporting data, a priori opinions have no business contributing to that judgment. Assessments of truth are uninformed unless they balance the impact of contradictory evidence. Although expectations are not always met, the scientific culture is inexorable: The data has the last word.
My activist persona sees fundamental societal change as frequently a bottom-up phenomenon. Whether it was civil rights, union rights or women's suffrage, ordinary people were the heroes. Washington's validation came later.
There were no egghead activists testing hypotheses about how best to integrate lunch counters. If that were the approach, Jim Crow might still be flourishing. Activists must strategize and seek truth with skeptical scientific eyes. But they won't rally the troops with an academic balancing of evidence. They must behave like activists.
But strategizing without nuance can be counterproductive. Strong commitments to a cause can yield the antithesis of critical scientific thinking: an aversion to the complexity of competing views, a search for cherry-picked supporting evidence only, a coterie of required opinions that beget tacit self-censorship and illusions of unanimity.
Evolutionary biologists posit that groupthink of this sort may be a natural human condition, nurtured in a prehistoric time when being ostracized by your compatriots could yield lethal exposure to hunger or saber-toothed tigers. We are thereby conditioned by ancient ancestors to embrace prevailing group viewpoints, not to parse evidence in search of objective truth.
The upshot is that a distorted relationship with science does not require embracing fantasylands like climate change denial. It can manifest itself more subtly in the all-too-human reality that scientific thinking is not the natural order of our species. We have to work at it.
To use an analogy that is both frivolous and harsh, the organic human tendency to lend credence to only one side of an issue, our side, is reminiscent of an old comedy routine where a sportscaster gives the baseball scores by reporting the run total of only one team in each game. It's presumably accurate, utterly uninformative and typical.
It's typical of peace activists who justifiably support Palestinian rights but who commonly present the runs scored by one team when they rationalize Palestinian transgressions or blame them reflexively on Israel.
It's endemic among environmentalists who, in one frequently unexamined breath, highlight the apocalyptic dangers of climate change and opposition to nuclear power, still the world's leading carbon-free energy source. The cognitive dissonance is rarely noticed. And when nuclear downsides are articulated, there is commonly only one acceptable viewpoint. So the debate is seldom joined.
It's widespread among avatars of every political persuasion who, by virtue of their passion, tend to reorder the logical path to truth. They do so by beginning at what should be the end, with conclusions that affirm preexisting beliefs, while eschewing the logical first step of evaluating competing possibilities.
The above examples are unrelated to your view of Palestinian rights or nuclear power. But they are very much about science. Not the eye-popping technologies and unfathomable discoveries. Instead, they are about how we process information we might prefer were not true, whether we allow scientific thinking to enhance understanding, whether we acknowledge competing realities as we seek truth in our daily lives.
In my leftwing-activist household growing up, the debates were endless, and the greatest crime for us kids was not having an opinion. The greatest certainty, whatever that opinion, was that someone would shoot it down.
These freewheeling family conflagrations were far removed from data-driven science. But they serendipitously imprinted the seminal scientific lesson that, in any discipline, understanding and discovery require unconstrained exploration, with no reasonable option a priori off the table, with tempered reverence for group expectations.
Activists should embrace the virtues of civil arguments that partly shoot them down. Recognize the dangers of confirmation bias through one-sided exposures. Accept the nobility of being wrong and changing one's mind. They must abandon that role of half-the-facts sportscaster and pursue raucous exploration of what is and isn't true, what can and can't be effective. They must strategize and seek truth like scientists, in short, while behaving and advocating like activists.
> Ken Schechtman, PhD, is a professor of biostatistics and medicine at the Washington University School of Medicine, a life-long political activist on the left, and a freelance writer when time permits.

Load-Date: February 3, 2021


End of Document


Letters to the editor, Feb. 22
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 22, 2021 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2021 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: ; Pg. A9
Length: 994 words
Body


Sens. Blunt and Hawley succumbed to self-delusion
For me, the most dangerous outcome of Donald Trump's trial isn't that Republicans acquitted a guilty man or that they lied about voter fraud. It's also not about a Missouri senator fist-pumping the rioters. The most dangerous outcome is that Sens. Roy Blunt and Josh Hawley are lying to themselves about the seriousness the insurrection posed to the integrity of our constitutional democracy.
When a person has lost the capacity to be honest with himself, he is easily given to delusional, even pathological speech and behavior. He becomes a danger to himself and others. What's to stop such a person from trampling on the Constitution again - or ignoring the rights of the people he or she was elected to serve?
Our esteemed Missouri senators seem to have succumbed to self-delusion. That's a frightening thought. When the time comes, I can only hope that Missouri voters will elect senators who are honest with us, and with themselves.
Mark Etling - St. Louis
Dr. Garza could give Gov. Parson advice on leadership
It is ridiculous and deeply disappointing that Gov. Mike Parson would accuse Dr. Alex Garza, director of the St. Louis Metropolitan Pandemic Task Force, of falsifying information and fear-mongering ("Editorial: Parson once again points the finger of blame elsewhere for his own failings," Feb. 13).
Dr. Garza, alongside the entire medical community, has led St. Louis' coronavirus response efforts with skill, compassion, calm, dignity and self-sacrifice. He deserves not only basic respect but accolades and cooperative collaboration from state leadership. Parson should publicly apologize to Dr. Garza for these unjustified accusations.
Then, Parson should closely study Garza's character traits, words and actions for ideas on how to improve his own leadership skills. Dr. Garza is a shining example of a capable leader, and the St. Louis region is fortunate to have him at the helm of our pandemic task force.
Katherine Mangum - St. Louis
Trump's legal problems can still end up in a conviction
If Republicans think acquitting Donald Trump is going to get him off the hook, think again ("Riot lawsuit just part of Trump's post-impeachment problems," Feb. 16). The legal system is at work now, and prosecutors don't make their indictment decisions based on politics. They base their decisions on the evidence they uncover. Scaredy-cat Republicans certainly aren't pursuing justice because they are afraid of getting a primary challenger in their next election.
In addition to the investigations going on in New York and Washington, now the Fulton County Georgia district attorney is looking into Trump's phone call with Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger. In the recorded call, Trump implored Raffensperger to "find" 11,780 votes so he could win the state of Georgia. I believe that's a slam-dunk case, a no-doubter, just like Richard Nixon's Watergate tapes.
In my opinion, Trump is going to be criminally charged and will become a deserved convicted felon.
Herbert Vermaas - Salem, Ill.
Editorial pages too obsessed with hating Republicans
I only see relentless anger and hate spit out by the Post-Dispatch Editorial Board, guest columnists and letter writers. There is little focus on the future.
There is no hope for unity and compromise or better days ahead now that Democrats are in complete control. No, just more orange-man-bad and our senators are terrorists, our state is the worst, and Donald Trump voters need mental help or incarceration.
It's so sad that so many wake up every day so angry, bitter and wanting to lash out with their hatred. I hope it makes them feel good because it sure can make them look childish, immature, vindictive and counterproductive. But of course some of us will still defend their right to say what they think, no matter how depressing it can be.
J. Viviano - St. Louis
Power companies use weather to justify higher rates
Regarding "Deep cold puts pinch on natural gas, drives Missouri prices sky-high" (Feb. 16): I find it interesting that the suppliers of natural gas have to raise prices when supplies decrease and demand increases. Classical economics would say that this is exactly what should happen, as a price increase normally would reduce demand. But why do prices go up in the immediate short term? Obviously, people are not going to stop using natural gas, and most will not even realize their costs have risen until it is too late to adjust behavior.
In my opinion, the wholesale cost should not have gone up. The wells are still producing the same gas. If the gas supply has been crimped due to the weather, it is a very temporary event. Power companies are merely passing on the price increase to their customers. In reality, what producers are doing is taking advantage of the situation. In the week of very cold weather, there would be no effect on usage by raising rates. I think the companies will just make excessive profits.
I'm not a socialist. I am a realist. Price increases in a shortage are a natural effect of economics. So it would be a good idea for power companies to alert their users to let them know what was happening with supplies and prices. Hopefully, in the future, the power companies will provide us with real-time information, allowing us to adjust our behavior. That way we can adjust our thermostats before we use the more expensive fuel.
Kerry S. McGill - St. Albans
Society has devolved us into believing outrageous lies
Are we devolving as a society? Extremist hate groups have become mainstream. We argue whether we should wear masks in a pandemic. Facts, data and science are ignored. Conspiracy theories prevail like Jewish space lasers causing wildfires, school shootings being hoaxes and there being no incitement to storm the Capitol. I could go on, but I have to run. I plunked down a quarter to see the bearded lady and the alligator boy.
Ryan Geraty - Lake Saint Louis
Read more letters online
at STLToday.com/letters

Graphic

 
 Dr. Alex Garza, commander of the St. Louis Metropolitan Pandemic Task Force, gives a grim warning on Nov. 13 of what lies ahead if the community does not adopt measures, like wearing masks. The hospitals will be at capacity and the ICUs will not be able to handle any more patients, coronavirus or otherwise, he said. 

Load-Date: February 22, 2021


End of Document


Editorial: Americans aren't reassured by a president who prefers his 'gut' over science
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 10, 2020 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A8
Length: 485 words
Byline:  By the Editorial Board 
Body


At the heart of the effort to fight the coronavirus epidemic is science. At the heart of President Donald Trump's handling of the crisis is his history of constantly denigrating the validity of science. Whether the issue is global climate change, fighting disease, addressing the health effects of e-cigarettes or scrutinizing gun violence with scientific data analysis, Trump consistently gives science short shrift, often just to feed his own ego.
The result is a president who leads based on what he calls his "gut" rather than science-driven data. Trump's gut tells him that the coronavirus fatality rate isn't as high as epidemiologists say, and that reports of worldwide infections surpassing 100,000 are part of a Democratic "hoax." Trump's gut tells him the administration has stopped the virus even though it continues to spread across 34 states, and the death toll keeps rising.
"In the U.S., it is the opposite of contained," Harvard epidemiologist Marc Lipsitch told CNN. There's actually no way to know whether U.S. containment efforts are working because the Trump administration hasn't made enough test kits available to determine the true scope of the virus's spread.
When Trump tried to demonstrate presidential leadership Friday by visiting the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, he donned his red Keep American Great hat, turning a serious disease-fighting effort into just another campaign stop. Perhaps his gut told him the hat would instill public confidence.
It didn't. Panic buying is causing store shelves to empty out of masks, antibacterial sanitizers and general provisions. Investors have dumped stock holdings in droves, causing a more-than 5,700-point drop in the Dow industrial average since Feb. 12. Airlines face upwards of $113 billion in losses. The city of Austin canceled its beloved and lucrative South By Southwest festival.
America is anything but reassured.
Trump's gut previously told him that the real problem behind massive fires in California weren't related to climate change but rather because the state failed to rake forests properly. This is the same person who offered his appalling (and false) medical analysis during GOP debates in 2015 that vaccines cause autism.
"We've had so many instances ... a child went to have the vaccine, got very, very sick, and now is autistic." Autism has become an "epidemic," he said. "It has gotten totally out of control."
Recently trying to calm the public, he contrasted coronavirus with ebola, whose sufferers "disintegrated," Trump said.
Trump says he knows how to manage monetary policy better than the Federal Reserve's data crunchers. When they rejected his political pressure to reduce interest rates in November 2018, he told The Washington Post: "They're making a mistake because I have a gut, and my gut tells me more sometimes than anybody else's brain can ever tell me."
No wonder Americans are running for cover.

Graphic

 
 President Donald Trump, wearing his campaign "Keep America Great" hat, speaks at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta on Friday alongside Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar, left, and CDC Director Robert Redfield, right. Photo by HYOSUB SHIN, ATLANTA JOURNAL-CONSTITUTION ---  Editorial Cartoon by Clay Bennett, Chattanooga Times Free Press - Public Service Announcement / Protection measures  Protect Yourself & Others from Coronavirus - Wash Hands Often - Avoid Touching Face - Cough Into Sleeve - Don't Listen to Trump (A viewer MUTES the TV)   

Load-Date: March 25, 2020


End of Document


Study finds COVID-19 vaccine may reduce virus transmission (copy)
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 4, 2021 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2021 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1069 words
Byline:  By DANICA KIRKA and LAURAN NEERGAARD Associated Press 
Body


AstraZeneca's COVID-19 vaccine shows a hint that it may reduce transmission of the virus and offers strong protection for three months on just a single dose, researchers said Wednesday in an encouraging turn in the campaign to suppress the outbreak.
The preliminary findings from Oxford University, a co-developer of the vaccine, could vindicate the British government's controversial strategy of delaying the second shot for up to 12 weeks so that more people can be quickly given a first dose. Up to now, the recommended time between doses has been four weeks.
The research could also bring scientists closer to an answer to one of the big questions about the vaccination drive: Will the vaccines actually curb the spread of the coronavirus?
It's not clear what implications, if any, the findings might have for the two other major vaccines being used in the West, Pfizer's and Moderna's.
In the United States, Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation's top infectious disease expert, dismissed the idea of deliberately delaying second shots, saying the U.S. will "go by the science" and data from the clinical trials. The two doses of the Pifzer and Moderna vaccines are supposed to be given three and four weeks apart.
Still, the research appears to be good news in the desperate effort to arrest the spread of the virus and also suggests a way to ease vaccine shortages and get shots into more arms more quickly.
The makers of all three vaccines have said that their shots proved to be anywhere from 70% to 95% effective in clinical trials in protecting people from illness caused by the virus. But it has been unclear whether the vaccines could also suppress transmission of the virus - that is, whether someone inoculated could still acquire the virus without getting sick and spread it to others.
As a result, experts have been saying that even people who have been vaccinated should continue to wear masks and keep their distance from others.
Volunteers in the British study underwent regular nasal swabs to check for the coronavirus, a proxy to try to answer the transmission question. The level of virus-positive swabs - combining volunteers who had asymptomatic infection with those who had symptoms - was 67% lower in the vaccinated group, the researchers reported.
While not a direct measure, "that's got to have a really beneficial effect on transmission," Oxford lead researcher Sarah Gilbert told a meeting of the New York Academy of Sciences on Wednesday.
The researchers also looked at how likely people who have been vaccinated are to get a symptom-free infection. In one subset of volunteers, there were 16 asymptomatic infections among the vaccinated and 31 in an unvaccinated comparison group.
Pfizer and Moderna also are studying the effect of their vaccines on asymptomatic infections.
Only the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines are being used in the United States. Britain is using both AstraZeneca's and Pfizer's. AstraZeneca's has also been authorized by the 27-nation European Union. Pfizer has not endorsed the British government's decision to lengthen the time between doses.
Mene Pangalos, executive vice president of biopharmaceuticals research and development at AstraZeneca, said that no patients experienced severe COVID-19 or required hospitalization three weeks after receiving a first dose, and that effectiveness appeared to increase up to 12 weeks after the initial shot.
"Our data suggest you want to be as close to the 12 weeks as you can" for the second dose, Pangalos said.
British Health Secretary Matt Hancock said the study "backs the strategy that we've taken" to make sure more people have gotten at least one shot. Britain's decision has been criticized as risky by other European countries.
Stephen Evans of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine said the study's suggestion that a single dose protected people for 12 weeks was "useful but not definitive."
He said that the authors themselves acknowledged their research was not designed to investigate the vaccine's dosing schedule and that their conclusions were based on statistical modeling, not actual patients tracked over time.
"It certainly isn't very strong evidence, but there is also no indication this is the wrong thing to do," Evans said of Britain's strategy.
One of the Oxford researchers, Dr. Andrew Pollard, said scientists also believe the AstraZeneca vaccine will continue to offer protection against new variants of COVID-19, though they are still waiting for data on that. Fast-spreading mutant versions have caused alarm around the world.
"If we do need to update the vaccines, then it is actually a relatively straightforward process. It only takes a matter of months, rather than the huge efforts that everyone went through last year to get the very large-scale trials run," Pollard told the BBC.
UN distribution
Meanwhile, a U.N.-backed program to supply COVID-19 vaccines to the neediest people worldwide is gearing up after a troubled start. The COVAX Facility announced plans Wednesday for an initial distribution of some 100 million doses by the end of March and more than 200 million more by the end of June to dozens of countries.
Nearly all of the doses expected for the first phase are due to come from AstraZeneca and its partner, the Serum Institute of India. The rollout will be contingent on the World Health Organization authorizing the AstraZeneca shot for emergency use, which is expected to happen this month.
Some 190 countries and territories are participating in COVAX, which has seen rich nations scoop up vaccine supplies, sometimes at premium prices.
The pandemic's worldwide death toll has eclipsed 2.2 million, including about 447,000 in the U.S., according to Johns Hopkins University data.
Super warning
New cases per day in the U.S. and the number of Americans in the hospital with COVID-19 have dropped sharply in the past few weeks, but deaths are still running at close to all-time highs at an average of around 3,100 a day. Deaths often lag behind the infection curve, because it can take weeks to sicken and die from COVID-19.
As the Super Bowl approaches, Fauci is warning people against inviting others over for Super Bowl parties, urging viewers to "just lay low and cool it" to avoid turning Sunday's big game into a superspreader event.
"You don't want parties with people that you haven't had much contact with," he told NBC's "Today" show. "You just don't know if they're infected."

Graphic

 
 Pharmacist Bhaveen Patel administers a dose of the Oxford/AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine to Joshua Labor on Jan. 28 at a vaccination clinic in Brixton, London.  

Load-Date: February 4, 2021


End of Document


Word detectives: Science may help finger opinion columnist
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 9, 2018 Sunday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A33
Length: 954 words
Byline:  By SETH BORENSTEIN Associated Press  
Body


WASHINGTON - Language detectives say the key clues to who wrote the anonymous New York Times opinion piece slamming President Donald Trump may not be the odd and glimmering "lodestar," but the itty-bitty words that people usually read right over: "I," "of" and "but."
And lodestar? That could be a red herring meant to throw sleuths off track, some experts say.
Experts use a combination of language use, statistics and computer science to help figure out who wrote documents that are anonymous or possibly plagiarized.
They've even solved crimes and historical mysteries that way.
Some call the field forensic linguistics, others call it stylometry or simply doing "author attribution."
The field is suddenly at center stage after an unidentified "senior administration official" wrote in the Times that he or she was part of a "resistance" movement working from within the administration to curb Trump's most dangerous impulses.
"My phone has been ringing off the hook with requests to do that analysis and I just don't have the time," says Duquesne University computer and language scientist Patrick Juola.
Robert Leonard, a Hofstra University linguistics professor who has helped solve murders by examining language, says if experts could get the right number of writing samples from officials whose identities are known, "an analysis could certainly be done."
One political scientist figures there are about 50 people in the Trump administration who fit the Times' description as a senior administration official and could be the author.
The key would be to look at how they write, the words they use, what words they put next to each other, spelling, punctuation and even tenses, experts say.
"Language is a set of choices. What to say, how to say and when to say it," Juola says. "And there's a lot of different options."
One of the favorite techniques of Juola and other experts is to look at what's called "function words." These are words people use all the time but that are hard to define because they more provide function than meaning. Some examples are "of," "with," "the," "a," "over" and "and."
"We all use them but we don't use them in the same way," Juola says. "We don't use them in the same frequency." Same goes with apostrophes and other punctuation.
For example, do you say "different from" or "different than?" asks computer science and data expert Shlomo Argamon of the Illinois Institute of Technology.
Women tend to use first- and second-person pronouns more - "I," "me" and "you" - and more present tense, Argamon says.
Men use "the," "of," "this" and "that" more often, he says.
"You look for clues and you try to assess the usefulness of those clues," Argamon says. But he is less optimistic that the Trump opinion piece case will be cracked for various reasons, including the New York Times' editing for style and possible efforts to fool language detectives with words that someone else likes to use such as "lodestar." Mostly, he's pessimistic because to do a proper comparison, samples from all suspects have to be gathered and have to be similar, such as all opinion columns as opposed to novels, speeches or magazine stories.
Rachel Greenstadt at Drexel University studies when people try to throw off investigators with words they don't normally use or purposeful bad spellings. She says her first instinct is that the word "lodestar" - one Vice President Mike Pence has used several times - is "a red herring." It seems too deliberate.
"Most people are still looking for sound bite-sized features like lodestar instead of trying to get a handle on the whole picture," says Hofstra's Leonard.
Greenstadt says language analysis "could kind of contribute to the picture" of who wrote the Times' opinion pieces, but she adds "by itself, I'd be concerned to use it."
Still, with the right conditions words matter.
Juola testified in about 15 trials and handled even more cases that never made it to court. His biggest case was in 2013, when a British newspaper got a tip that the book "The Cuckoo's Calling" by Robert Galbraith was really written by Harry Potter author J.K. Rowling. In about an hour, Juola fed two Rowling books, "The Cuckoo's Calling" and six other novels into his computer, analyzed the language patterns with four different systems and concluded that Rowling did it.
A couple of days later, Rowling confessed.
It was far from the first time that language use fingered the real culprit. The Unabomber's brother identified him because of his distinctive writing style. Field pioneers helped find a kidnapper who used the unique term "devil strip" for the grassy area between the sidewalk and road. The phrase is only used in parts of Ohio.
Even in politics, words are poker tells. In 1996, the novel "Primary Colors" about a Clintonesque presidential candidate set Washington abuzz trying to figure out who was the anonymous author. An analysis by a Vassar professor and other work pointed to Newsweek's Joe Klein, and he finally admitted it.
But the literary sleuthing goes back to the founding of the republic. Historians had a hard time figuring out which specific Federalist Papers were written by Alexander Hamilton and which were by James Madison. A 1963 statistical analysis figured it out: One of the many clues came down to usage of the words "while" and "whilst." Madison used "whilst"; Hamilton preferred "while."
Juola says experts in the field can generally tell introverts from extroverts, men from women, education level, age, location, almost everything but astrological sign.
"The science is very good," Juola said. "It's not quite DNA. It's actually considered by some scientists to be considered the second-most-accurate form of forensic identification we have because it is so good."

Graphic

 
 FILE - In this April 25, 2006, file photo, Robert Leonard, a Hofstra University college professor teaching forensic linguistics, lectures to students at Hofstra University in Hempstead, N.Y. Language detectives say the key clues to who wrote the anonymous New York Times opinion piece slamming President Donald Trump may not be the odd and glimmering "lodestar," but the itty-bitty words that people usually read right over: "I," "of," and "but." Leonard says if experts could get the right number of writing samples from officials whose identities are known, "an analysis could certainly be done." (AP Photo/Ed Betz, File) 

Load-Date: September 10, 2018


End of Document


Sultan: The truth about Helen Keller and why it matters
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 17, 2021 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2021 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: STL LIFE; Pg. B1
Length: 887 words
Byline:  BY AISHA SULTAN St. Louis Post-Dispatch 
Body


People believing or spreading crazy, false ideas is hardly newsworthy these days. But there are compelling elements to a recent viral bit of misinformation about an American hero.
Hollywood screenwriter Daniel Kunka shared a startling discovery on Twitter earlier this month after having a conversation with his teenage nephews and nieces: They claimed Helen Keller was a fraud, who had never written her books or accomplished what is attributed to her.
This absurd belief may have arisen from a joke that morphed into a meme spread widely on TikTok, a video-sharing social media channel popular with teens.
"They believe people around (Keller) ‘pumped her up' and wrote the book for her," Kunka posted earlier this month, referring to Keller's autobiography in the exchange with his younger family members. "And apparently 15 million others on TikTok feel the same way."
"This isn't from lack of education or empathy," Kunka said. "This is more about how groupthink can travel through social media like a virus until it suddenly just becomes the truth, I think."
We've all seen this disturbing phenomenon become commonplace in recent years. There are millions who believe that former President Barack Obama wasn't born in America, or that he is a Muslim. Or that the Holocaust didn't happen. Or that the coronavirus is a hoax. Or that Sandy Hook was staged. Or that Donald Trump actually won the last presidential election.
But in the case of each of these lies, there are people who stand to benefit by duping others.
The lie about Keller strikes closer to the "flat-Earth" variety of conspiracy. Who benefits from spreading such an easily disprovable, silly lie?
Isabella Lahoue wrote a post on Medium outing herself as a member of Gen Z who doubts Keller's existence. She wrote that she considers the inspiring historical figure to be an "urban legend."
"Maybe we don't believe in her because we're growing up in a world of fake news. We know the power of manipulation and lies in the media, and we're losing faith in the sources everyone once trusted," she wrote. "There's too much data and too many lies circulating for us to process and believe it all."
This is a significant admission. Bad actors have capitalized on information overload and the inability to discern what is true to manipulate millions. They've targeted social media as the most fertile ground to spread lies and chaos.
When Kirk Adams, president and CEO of American Foundation for the Blind, heard about the fake Keller meme, his first reaction was to laugh.
"That is so absurd that it doesn't merit arguing," he thought. But the head of the organization where Keller had worked for more than 40 years quickly realized it gave them an opportunity to educate people. Their site offers free, accessible resources for parents and educators from the Helen Keller archives. There are lesson plans for how students can conduct inquiries and do research online - a paramount skill in today's world. This is the way to counter the efforts of those grooming Generation Z to distrust verified facts in a post-truth age.
The most perplexing thing about the rising tide of fact-deniers is the segment resistant to any evidence that might sway them. They will discount verified video footage, phone calls, historical records, data and science that is contrary to what they have seen on YouTube, TikTok, Reddit or on propaganda sources.
A longtime reader once told me that "Jesus Christ himself" could say Obama was a Christian, and he still wouldn't believe it. So, how do we prevent a younger generation from sliding into this same entrenchment in misinformation?
We must ignore the temptation to write off misguided beliefs with horrified amusement. The pandemic has driven home the deadly consequences of the unchecked spread of misinformation. The Harvard Kennedy School Misinformation Review published a study in August investigating the spread of COVID misinformation on social media, and how content moderation by these sites can help contain the spread. They found that mainstream sources like Fox News and the New York Post actually do more to spread conspiracy theories than alternative sources because social media platforms filtered far fewer conspiracy posts from mainstream sites. These platforms were too slow to react to the magnitude of misinformation being spread, the researchers found.
Just as the American Foundation for the Blind did, we have to react as soon as we learn that misinformation campaigns are gaining traction. Generation Z considers itself to be the most inclusive and embracing of diversity yet this meme perpetuates a harmful myth about those with disabilities. The idea that Keller's disabilities would have made her accomplishments impossible reveals an ugly bias.
Helen Keller was a champion for fairness, justice, intellectual rigor and curiosity. When Nazi students in Germany included her book among those to be burned, she wrote a scathing letter:
"History has taught you nothing if you think you can kill ideas. ... You can burn my books and the books of the best minds in Europe, but the ideas in them have seeped through a million channels and will continue to quicken other minds."
Imagine what her response might have been to her modern day social media erasure among young people.
Indeed, a million channels can quicken other minds.

Graphic

 
 Helen Keller, as she appeared in the 1920s as she traveled the country advocating for pensions for the blind.  

Load-Date: January 18, 2021


End of Document


EDUCATORS CRITICIZE SCIENCE TEACHING
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 7, 1990, SUNDAY, LATE FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 706
Length: 1685 words
Byline: K.C. Cole 1990, New York Times News Service
Body


NEW YORK - Like highway-fatality statistics, the numbers coming out of the National Science Foundation have lost their ability to shock.  But here's the latest finding: In a recent science test taken by high school seniors in 14 countries, U.S. students ranked 14th.  College enrollment in science courses is at a record low; of high school students who do enter college intent on pursuing science careers, as many as 40 percent drop out after the first course and 60 percent drop out by graduation.  This scarcity of home-grown graduates has left the doors wide open for foreigners; today, they account for 60 percent of all engineering and 40 percent of all math doctoral students.  ''Made in Japan used to be a joke,'' said Bill Aldridge, executive director of the National Science Teachers Association, in an interview.  ''Now it's U.S. products that are considered shoddy. But no one wants to acknowledge the depth of the problem.'' Periodic alarms have sounded over the trouble in science education since Sputnik punctured the United States' scientific smugness in 1957.  The well-meaning response from legislators, according to Aldridge and others, has only made things worse.  In general, enhancement programs are being set up for the already advantaged, focusing only on the brightest students.  The general idea, according to George Tressel of the National Science Foundation, has been: ''Don't educate them better: Raise the standards, filter harder. We've gotten so good at weeding out that no one's left.''
Most high school students simply don't believe they can learn science, according to a recent paper from the Science Teachers Association.  Teachers and counselors tend to agree, the paper reports, and ''directly or indirectly convey this opinion to their students.'' One student at Yale, for example, recalled a biology professor who opened his introductory course with: ''This class is a war between you and me.'' Tressel says science is elitist; studies have shown that poor students, women, minorities and the disabled are, at best, slighted in the classroom.  Because these groups constitute an increasingly large proportion of the work force, effects mount exponentially.  ''If we don't get more women and minorities in the pipeline, we're going to go down the tubes,'' said Andrew Ahlgren, professor of education at the University of Minnesota, on leave at the American Association for the Advancement of Science.  What's now left in the pipeline is not necessarily the best but the best behaved.  ''Students are rewarded for being quiet, for doing what the teacher says - it's not the ones who challenge the teacher,'' Aldridge said.  ''The truly great kids are lost.'' The situation gets worse the longer children stay in school. According to National Science Foundation data, whereas U.S. fifth-graders rank 8th among industrialized nations in science, ninth-graders rank 15th.  Science educators generally concur that by eighth grade, as many as two-thirds of students have decided they don't like the subject.  ''Little children toddle off to school with positive attitudes toward science and math,'' said Robert F. Watson, the Science Foundation's director of undergraduate education.  ''By third grade, a tremendous number don't like it anymore. Unless you assume some physiological change is taking place, something is obviously happening in the schools.'' What's happening from grade school to graduate school is the suffocation of curiosity under an avalanche of raw fact.  Mary Budd Rowe, professor of science education at the University of Florida, estimates that more new terms are introduced in a typical high school biology text than in the first two years of a foreign language.  For example, in a single fifth-grade class period recently observed by Kathleen J. Roth, an assistant professor of teacher education, the teacher introduced the following concepts: Light as energy, light for seeing, light travels fast, the speed of light, atoms, photons, sources of light (artificial versus natural), bioluminescence, uses of light, animals that give off light, reasons light travels fast, lightning, amplitude, wavelengths, light travels in straight lines, intensity of light, pioneer uses of candles, electricity provides artificial light, watts, volts, fluorescence and the inability of light to curve.  Teachers often blame the epidemic of testing that has infected school administrators.  ''Testers,'' Rowe said, ''break science up into small objectives. What you get is an unassembling of the most fantastic feature of science - its stories, its patterns. You get a denudement of everything that's rich and fun and beautiful.'' It is as if music students were forced to play scales without ever hearing Mozart.  In class, teachers feel forced to cover everything that might be on the test. If they don't, students sometimes complain.  ''They say they have to know it for the Regents, or the SAT,'' said a science teacher at Biology 2000, a recent conference of high school and college teachers sponsored by Wesleyan University, in Middletown, Conn.  The result is millions of children ''wasting their time, learning virtually nothing of value,'' says Charles Anderson of Michigan State's Institute for Research on Teaching.  He cites a study in 1985 by Robert and Stewart Yager of the University of Iowa that found no improvement in students from the 7th to 11th grade, although most students take science courses in the interim.  The let-them-eat-facts approach is based on a belief that the litany will become meaningful at some later date, when students are ready for ''higher-order thinking.'' But this is ''empty rationalization,'' according to Anderson and Roth.  Their study, presented in a recent paper, demonstrated that: ''Children begin to engage in the activities labeled 'higher-order thinking' - description, explanation, prediction and control of the world around them - before they learn to memorize facts and reproduce them on demand. In fact, students who are made to memorize and reproduce facts are practicing an activity that has little in common with meaningful uses of scientific knowledge.'' Recently some educators concluded that students don't like science largely because they don't believe in it.  Based on their first-hand experiences, youngsters create stories about how the universe works - ideas that are difficult to dislodge.  ''When they get to school, they get different interpretations,'' said Audrey Champagne, senior project director at the American Association for the Advancement of Science.  ''They don't match. So kids lose interest.'' Most science is a matter of overcoming common sense.  It does not make sense, for example, that coal and diamonds are simply different arrangements of carbon atoms, or that white light - no color at all - is really the spectrum's colors mixed together.  ''Rather than resolve the dilemma,'' Rowe said of students, many ''just keep two explanations in their heads: the one they believe and the one they learn to say and do for passing tests.'' Perhaps the most talked-about example among science educators is the unsettling new movie ''A Private Universe,'' produced by Harvard University and the Smithsonian Institution.  Capped and gowned, students graduating from Harvard are interviewed about simple concepts in astronomy.  Quickly it becomes evident that most have carried through college the same misconceptions they formed before entering grade school.  Asked why the seasons change, 21 of 23 say summer is warmer because Earth is closer to the Sun.  A faculty member cannot explain the phases of the Moon.  The movie then follows a teacher in the Boston area as she struggles through the same concepts with her ninth-graders.  She finds their misconceptions ''mind-boggling.'' ''You assume they know certain things,'' she explains.  Meanwhile, the more teachers flail, the faster students sink.  In a paper presented to the American Chemical Society in 1982, Rowe said the chemistry-student survival rate could be improved by recognizing that a limit exists to what students can learn in a given period.  In introductory chemistry classes, she told her audience, ''the rate at which ideas must be absorbed usually exceeds the capacity of the brain to absorb or the hand to record.'' The best students capture less than 30 percent.  In a series of experiments allowing students to pause for 2 minutes every 10 minutes or so of class time - to collect their thoughts - Rowe found retention rates significantly increased.  Slowing the pace is the primary goal of the Science Teachers Association's new guidelines for improving science courses.  Students in many other countries spend more time than do U.S. students studying science.  But that time is spread over a greater number of years.  ''No wonder so few of our students learn the subjects and why so many see our courses as hopelessly difficult,'' the guidelines conclude.  ''In effect, the physics that we cover in one year is spread out over a period of five years in U.S.S.R. schools.'' One in three high school physics classes and one in five chemistry classes are taught by teachers not trained in those disciplines, says the Science and Mathematics Education Briefing Book, compiled for the Science Teachers Association.  The problem is exacerbated on the college level by the emphasis on research at the expense of teaching.  The result, according to a study released in September by Sigma Xi, the Scientific Research Society, is that entry-level courses fail to stimulate students, ''much less educate them.'' Educators agree change is needed. Yet teachers resist. Many don't see the point in ''all the extra stuff between the facts,'' Anderson said. They think the new material is ''watered down.'' Engaging students in intellectual struggle is so novel to teachers that most are afraid of it, said Rowe.  ''Many are afraid of even engaging them in conversation,'' she said.  ''I've heard faculty say it over and over again: 'If I do that, I'll lose control.' To my amazement, discipline is often the major concern.''


Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document


In CDC's backyard, school reopening divides experts
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 7, 2021 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2021 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 897 words
Byline:  By KANTELE FRANKO Associated Press 
Body


Just down the road from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in a community flush with resident health professionals, the Decatur, Georgia, school system had no shortage of expert input on whether to resume in-person classes amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Scores of public health and medical professionals from the affluent, politically liberal Atlanta suburb have weighed in about what's best for their own kids' schools.
One emergency medicine doctor said initial reopening plans for the district's 5,000-plus students weren't safe enough. A pediatrician doing epidemiology work for the CDC advocated delaying. Others, including a leader of the CDC's COVID-19 vaccine efforts, argued the district could get students back in classrooms safely - and that not doing so jeopardized their development and mental health.
"The challenge for me has been trying to weigh all of these things that I'm being told by experts and non-experts alike to try to make the best decision that we can," Superintendent David Dude said. "And that's what I, and I'm sure other superintendents, have been struggling with."
Each side argued data and science supported their view in a debate over reopening schools that sometimes veered into vitriol. The division in Decatur illustrates the challenges U.S. schools - many in communities without so much expertise - have faced in evaluating what's safe.
Health officials say there's growing evidence that children aren't the main drivers of community spread and that transmission is relatively low in schools if mask-wearing, social distancing and contact tracing is in effect. The CDC says that for schools to open safely, they and their surrounding communities must adopt prevention measures.
Without specific reopening instructions from federal and state leaders, school administrators have had to become amateur epidemiologists, Dude said.
When he first consulted privately with CDC and other professionals - who he said wouldn't speak out publicly at that point in the process because the pandemic response had been politicized - people accused him of not being transparent. When he rolled out fall reopening plans, some parents and teachers questioned whether it was safe and which virus metrics were used. When he hit the brakes on reopening, other parents got riled up, complaining about the abrupt change or how virtual schooling wasn't tenable.
Tiffany Tesfamichael, a single parent who stretched her budget to move to Decatur because of the well-regarded schools, was upset that her freshman daughter had to struggle through remote learning while neighbors citing concerns about virus spread protested against opening schools, but not against opening businesses.
"Why aren't they out here with signs protesting restaurants if they really, really mean it?" she said.
Dude ended up asking a giant committee of volunteers - many with relevant expertise, though it wasn't required - to make recommendations, including parameters for reopening and protocols to limit virus spread in classes.
Then he decided a new plan for January: Students at the seven elementary schools could return, staying in cohorts of 15 or fewer and attending only in the mornings, to avert the logistical nightmare of an unmasked lunch crowd. Older students would stay remote because it was too difficult to arrange them in small cohorts.
Some CDC employees and other health professionals objected to that part, arguing in a letter to a community news website that safe, in-person learning was doable for older students using precautions other than cohorting, and that decision-makers were misreading evidence about virus transmission in schools. A hospital doctor treating COVID-19 patients countered with her own letter, warning that reopening as cases surged would be irresponsible.
The expert insights made parent Kerry Ludlam reconsider her own stance.
"I think letters like that are so powerful because you think you feel one way and then you read a letter with all of these experts. ... And you're like, ‘Well, their opinion is different from mine. Have I been wrong all the time?'" Ludlam said.
She remained inclined to keep her middle schoolers in distance learning, partly because an autoimmune disorder increases her vulnerability. But she said learning more about other families' circumstances and academic challenges convinced her that parents should at least be offered the choice of face-to-face learning.
Without it, some families moved to private schools or other suburbs offering in-person classes.
Around Decatur, neighbors dodged the issue in polite conversation as tensions rose during school board meetings and on social media. Some commenters pushed the debate to its sharpest and crudest edges, suggesting that advocates of resuming in-person classes were OK with gambling teachers' lives in a desperate grasp for normalcy, or that perhaps people urging continued remote learning couldn't see past their privilege to understand how much other families were struggling.
From behind their keyboards and screens, "people just kind of let it fly - forgetting that at some point, the world is going to get back to normal, and we're going to see each other at school or the pool or, you know, the grocery store and have time to stand and talk," Ludlam said. "And we're going to have to face the things we said to each other and the things we accused each other of."

Graphic

 
 A sign staking out a view in the debate over how children should be educated in the midst of a pandemic is seen recently in Decatur, Ga., just down the road from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In a community flush with resident health professionals, Decatur's school system had no shortage of expert input on whether to resume in-person classes. 

Load-Date: February 7, 2021


End of Document


Meet the 2019 Post-Dispatch Scholar Athletes STLHSS SCHOLAR ATHLETES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 9, 2019 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2019 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: SPECIAL SECTION; Pg. C1
Length: 33386 words
Byline:  St. Louis Post-Dispatch and STLhighschoolsports.com 
Body


The Scholar Athlete Program was the brainchild of Hall of Fame Baseball Writer Bob Broeg in 1965. Broeg wanted to honor high school seniors whose success was not only on the field, court or ice rink – students who excelled in the classroom as well.
For the 53rd year, the St. Louis Post-Dispatch is honoring local Scholar Athletes. These are young men and women who lettered in at least one varsity sport, are in the top 25 percent of their graduating class and are in good standing at their respective high school.
Join us in applauding this year's 161 St. Louis Post-Dispatch Scholar Athletes. The recipients are honored in today's St. Louis Post-Dispatch, online now at stlhighschoolsports.com and at a pre-game reception at this evening's St. Louis Cardinals game. They will then enjoy tonight's game with family and friends.
> MORE STORIES Find more coverage and photos online at STLhighschoolsports.com
* ARCHVING NOTE: These bios were obtained from the online version (https://tinyurl.com/53rd-Scholar-Athletes) which may contain more info than the print version. Print pages are indicated in parentheses.)
---
(Page C2)
AFFTON: ELIAS COTTON Academic rank - 19 of 193. Sports - Wrestling, cross country, track and field. Academic bio - Honor roll, nine-time scholastic athlete award recipient, Bright Flight, Chancellor's Scholarship (Mizzou), US Navy ROTC Scholarship, Missouri Boys State Citizen. Athletic bio - Wrestling: 2018-19 first team all-conference, team MVP; 2017-18 team most improved. Cross country: 2015-16 team most improved. Etc: Affton Wendy's High School Heisman recipient. Activities - Step Up STL Volunteer, AHS Band Section Leader, Thespian (AHS Theatre), Mathletes, TSA, TEAMS, PLTW Engineering, Saint Louis Jesuit Wrestling Club. College, major - University of Missouri with the US Navy ROTC program, electrical engineering. Goal - "A lot of my goals are incremental in the sense that I have one after the other. My first goal is to graduate and become a nuclear engineer for the Navy, and serve my country for as long as I can. Later on, I want to become a high school wrestling coach and live out my days in a log cabin in the Rockies with my family. My overall goal, however, is to do good for the world. Whether it's a small or large impact, I want to make a positive mark on the world and see the people around me succeed." Favorite subject - Physics and calculus. "Math has always been my favorite part of school and both of these courses are very math intensive. The biggest reason has to be my grandfather's sentiment about math: it's the language of the universe. I always get excited when we derive a value in physics class, then we test it and the value we calculated ends up being the real life tested value. It's an awesome feeling." Favorite book - "Living With a SEAL" by Jesse Itzler. Favorite musician - Grandson. Role model - "The people I consider my biggest role models are my parents. My mom is one of the toughest, more organized, and driven people I know. She's taught me so much and has given me so many opportunities, and has pushed me when I can't move forward myself. My father has been one of the most supportive and upbeat parts of my life, and has taught me how to love everyone around me, love life, and be as happy as I can be. The unconditional love and support my parents have given me throughout the years (has) made all the difference. I know that without their guidance and support (and sometimes redirecting), I would not be where I am today."
ALTHOFF: MITCHELL KIDD Academic rank - 3 of 82. Sports - Soccer, tennis, volleyball. Academic bio - National Honor Society; Illinois State Scholar; top 10 percent. Athletic bio - Soccer (2018):South Seven offensive player of the year; Post-Dispatch All-Metro third team; Chicagoland all-state team; first team all-conference; all-sectional. Activities - Fellowship of Christian Athletes; Big Brothers; Campus Ministry. College - Truman State. Goal - "I hope to be a high school soccer coach." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "The Count of Monte Cristo." Favorite musician - Drake. Role model - "My father, because he was a math teacher for 13 years and that is what I plan to do when I get older."
ALTON: TAMI WONG Academic rank - 1 of 507. Sports - Softball. Academic bio - Valedictorian, Platinum Alpha, Silver Medallion, Illinois State Scholar, Rotary Student of the Month. Athletic bio - Art Fahrner student-athlete of the month, Alton offensive player of the year, softball team MVP. Activities - School: National Honor Society, Mu Alpha Theta, Saturday Scholars, student council, Minority Excellence, Scholar Bowl, Redbird Nest, Biology Club, Spanish Club. Volunteer: Special Olympics flag football/basketball, Salvation Army bell ringing, Adopt-A-Family, middle school softball. College, major - Washington University, biochemistry on the pre-dental path. Goal - "I hope to be happy. I have worked so hard in high school and will do the same in college to set myself up to have a good life after I graduate. I hope that everything I've done will pay off, and all of the sacrifices I've made thus far will be worth it. The ultimate goal is to achieve happiness." Favorite subject - Zoology. "It does not pertain to my field of study in college, but it is the most interesting class that I have now, and it is the one class where I can definitely say that I learn new things every day." Favorite book - "Heat" by Mike Lupica. Favorite musician - Drake; James Arthur. Role model - "I consider my parents my role models. They had to work so hard for everything in their childhoods and didn't have the opportunity to have fun and play sports. I'm extremely lucky that I have that chance to become a first-generation college student-athlete and live out the dreams of my parents for them. I hope that when I grow up, I can be half the people that they are."
ALTON MARQUETTE: CHRISTOPHER HARTRICH Sports - Basketball, soccer. Academic bio - IHSA all-state academic first team, Student of the Month, Scholar Athlete of the Week. Athletic bio - Soccer: First team all-state; all-sectional team; 2017 Class 1A state champion; Post-Dispatch athlete of the week. Basketball: 110 career wins; broke single-season school record in wins with 30; all-sectional team; all-state honorable mention. Activities - Student council (four years); National Honor Society. College - University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Goal - "Hope to obtain a degree from U of I in business and help other achieve their goals." Favorite subject - History. "Learning about the past has always interested me." Favorite book - Of Mice and Men. Favorite musician - Drake. Role model - "My father because he has pushed me and made me the man I am today and I am forever grateful for him."
BARAT: MIA DAVIS Sports - Golf, lacrosse, basketball, dance. Academic bio - Honor roll, National Honor Society (president). Athletic bio - Skippy Keefer nominee; team captain for golf, volleyball and basketball. Activities - School: Student council, honor council, choir, Christmas club, band, campus ministry, student ambassador. Volunteer: Camp Weloki For Girls, a camp founded by Dr. Tim Jordan. It provides a fun, accepting, and safe place for girls to speak their truths and make real connections with other girls. I started going to Camp Weloki about six years ago, and after being a camper, I have started to volunteer and work there to give back to younger girls; various service organizations through Barat's service program; Archbishop May Service Award, among other service awards at Barat Academy. College, major - Undecided, nursing. Goal - "As a nurse, I aspire to move up in the field as a nurse practitioner or teacher. One of my other goals in life is to be a mother and be able to teach them all of the lessons that I've learned throughout my life and especially through sports." Favorite subject - Biology. Favorite book - "The Kite Runner." Favorite musician - Taylor Swift. Role model - "My role model is my mom because she shows me what it means to work hard and love other people. My other role models are Taylor Swift and Michelle Obama because they are positive examples of strong, powerful, and influential women in today's society."
BAYLESS: AMRA MEHMEDI Academic rank - 4 of 120. Sports - Volleyball, soccer. Academic bio - Honor roll. Athletic bio - First team all-conference. Activities - Student council (president), National Honor Society (recording secretary), FBLA, DECA. College, major - UMSL, marketing. Goal - "I hope to find a job where I look forward to going to each and every day." Favorite subject - Sociology. "I love learning how groups of people work together." Favorite book - "The Kite Runner." Favorite musician - Shawn Mendes. Role model - "My parents because they have always been there for me in the worst of times and in the best of times."
BELLEVILLE EAST: CHLOE MCISAAC Academic rank - 1 of 561. Sports - Tennis. Academic bio - National Honor Society, Mu Alpha Theta (Math Honors Society), English Honors Society, Spanish Honors Society, Math Departmental Honors, Social Studies Departmental Honors, Spanish Departmental Honors. Athletic bio - Four-year state qualifier;Southwestern Conference player of the year (three times); second team all-state (2018); first team all-conference (four times). Activities - Fellowship of Christian Athletes (officer and metro east student board member), Mentor in East Scholars Society, Spanish Club, First Priority (student leader). Volunteer: Peer Tutoring, summer tennis camp coach. College, major - University of Southern Indiana, mathematics, specializing in secondary education. Goal - "As an aspiring high school math teacher, I hope to impact high school students lives through teaching and coaching. Some of the most influential people in my life have been teachers and coaches, so I want to continue their legacy by positively impacting high school students." Favorite subject - "Math! I love learning critical thinking skills, practicing aspects from all branches of math, and earning satisfaction from solving complex problems." Favorite book - "I am Malala." Favorite musician - Jon Bellion. Role model - "I consider my three sisters role models to me because they constantly work to their fullest potential and strive to reach their goals while maintaining a positive attitude."
(Page C3)
BELLEVILLE WEST: WILL LANXON Academic rank - 27 of 475. Sports - Football, baseball, basketball. Academic bio - Academic all-state football (twice); Rotary Club Football Scholar Athlete; academic all-conference football. Athletic bio - All-conference football at three different positions; all-conference baseball. Activities - Student council; Mentor/Mentee Club. College - Lindenwood-St. Charles. Goal - "I hope to one day run my own business." Favorite subject - Social Studies. "I enjoy learning about history and different countries." Favorite book - "The Great Gatsby." Favorite musician - Brad Paisley. Role model - "My dad has always been a role model for me because he showed me how to work hard and taught me to always have high character on and off the field."
BORGIA: GRANT STRAATMANN Academic rank - 15 of 120. Sports - Cross Country, track and field, wrestling. Academic bio - St. Francis Borgia HS Knight of Honor Award; Academic Letter; honor roll; Certification of Excellence Physics, Earth & Space Science; Excellence in Video Production; Distinguished Theology Student. Athletic bio - Cross country: team state qualifier (three times); AAA Conference champion (2018). Track and field: AAA conference champion in 1600 and 800 (2018). Wrestling: AAA Conference champion, 138 pounds (two times). Activities - Piano; US Coast Guard auxiliary member; National Honor Society; concert/marching band (xylophone); first in division, seventh overall at Bass Pro Conservation Marathon in Springfield (Nov. 2017). Volunteer: St. Francis Borgia Food Pantry, Borgia H.S. Mass, Franklin County Humane Society, Lutheran Church Harvest Table. College, major - Maryville University, business administration. Goal - "(Become) an officer in the United States Coast Guard." Favorite subject - Navy JROTC. "I enjoy wearing the uniform, drilling and learning more about the military from guest speakers." Favorite book - "Catcher in the Rye." Favorite musician - Warren Straatmann, my dad. Role model - "I consider my former wrestling teammate, Dominic Dolce, a role model because he has a positive attitude no matter what."
BREESE CENTRAL: HUNTER STRUBHART Academic rank - 6 of 130. Sports - Track and field, soccer. Academic bio - National Honor Society; Illinois State Scholar; Top Ten Percent Club. Athletic bio - Soccer: three-time regional champion. Track and field: state qualifier in 1600-meter relay. Activities - Pit Crew (student section); hobbies revolve around the outdoors, such as bass fishing, waterfowl hunting, and deer hunting. College - Minnesota. Goal - "I hope to have an income large enough to support the expensive hobbies of both me and my family. I hope to accomplish this through an engineering degree that will work to make the future safer and more efficient." Favorite subject - Math. "Solving a problem is extremely rewarding, and it gives you the a sense of self pride that is unmatched in other classes." Favorite book - "Tunnels" series by Roderick Gordon and Brian Williams. Role model - "I do not have a role model. I like to base my goals off of my own ideas and interests, because I believe that independence and individuality is important to success in life."
BRENTWOOD: MARGARET CALLIHAN Sports - Volleyball, basketball, soccer. Academic bio - 4.13 weighted cumulative GPA; National Honor Society member and officer (2017-2019); Spanish Honor Society member and officer (2017-2019); Honor Roll (2015-2019). Athletic bio - Volleyball: all-conference (two times). Basketball: all-conference (three times). Soccer: all-conference (junior season); MVP (sophomore season). Activities - Student council (three years); Fellowship of Christian Athletes member and huddle leader (four years); St. Louis FCA Student Board (two years); class officer (senior); Spanish Club member and president; mission trip to Indianapolis (2017). College, major - University of Missouri, elementary education. Goal - "I hope to positively change the world. I want to live and happy and good life." Favorite subject - College credit biology. Favorite book - "Mockingbird" by Kathryn Erskine. Favorite musician - Dan + Shay. Role model - "The biggest role model in my life is my younger sister. She is the strongest and most hard-working person I know. She has shown me how to love life and laugh often. I'm also very grateful for my parents. They have taught me to be kind to all, and pursue everything wholeheartedly. My family has influenced me to become the person I am today."
BRUSSELS: GRACE NOLTE Academic rank - 1 of 16. Sports - Volleyball, cheerleading, softball. Academic bio - Outstanding Citizenship Award by the Sons of the American Revolution; Brussels student of the month (three times); High Honor Roll (four years); Silver Medallion recipient; Provost Scholar at SIUE; Honors Program member at SIUE. Athletic bio - Member of Brussels High volleyball team that earned first regional victory; most coachable award; volleyball co-captain. Activities - National Honor Society, member (two years) and president (senior year); student council member (two years) and president (junior); Pep Club, member (four years) and secretary (senior); Civics Club, member (three years) and secretary (junior); Brussels Scholastic Bowl team captain; cheerleading co-captain; Blood Drive coordinator; Junior Achievement Teacher volunteer; Veteran's Day Program volunteer; Vacation Bible School leader volunteer; Canned Food Drive volunteer. College, major - SIU Edwardsville, cellular and molecular biology. "I plan to continue my education and obtain a masters in health science at an accredited physician's assistant program." Goal - "I hope to be content and happy in life. I plan on having a family and living on a farm with lots of animals. As for my career, I plan on becoming a physician's assistant and bringing medicine to rural areas. Coming from a small town, I understand the need to provide medicine close to home and I intend to do so after I graduate." Favorite subject - English/literature. "I absolutely love learning about the history that comes along with literature. Reading a story that can take you into a whole new world in indescribable to me. I also enjoy writing and journaling." Favorite book - "The Glass Castle" by Jeannette Walls. Favorite musician - Garth Brooks; Jon Pardi. Role model - "My mom because she is such an amazing person who exemplifies the qualities of how to be happy in life and show compassion to everyone. She is the kindest, wisest person who I strive to be like! I look up to her for everything and admire her strength."
CAHOKIA: JACOB BULLOCK Academic rank - 10 of 190. Sports - Wrestling, football, track and field. Academic bio - Honor roll (four years); 4.0 GPA. Athletic bio - Wrestling: 2019 state champion, 2018 state runner-up. Football: all-conference. Activities - National Honor Society; Interact. College, major - Old Dominion, business or sports management. Goal - "To be a businessman." Favorite subject - Social studies. Favorite book - "Bluford" series. Role model - "I consider all of my teachers and coaches to be my role model."
CARLINVILLE: LEXI EGELHOFF Academic rank - 6 of 112. Sports - Volleyball, soccer, basketball. Academic bio - Illinois State Scholar; IHSA all-state academic team honorable mention; IHSA scholastic achievement; Lions Academic Excellence; National Honor Society; High Honor Roll; Marshal for graduation; Citizenship award. Athletic bio - Volleyball: offensive player of the year; player of the week. Soccer: all-conference, most improved. Activities - Student Council president; school musical; FORCE (Friends Offering Respect Citizenship and Empathy); yearbook. Volunteer: church mission trips to New Jersey and Ohio; Help the Elf; Thanksgiving food pantry packaging; Salvation Army bell ringer; delivering Christmas cards to nursing homes. College, major - Belmont University, nursing. Goal - "As an adult I see myself becoming a successful working mother and wife. After getting my bachelors in nursing I am going back to school to become a nurse practitioner. I currently am planning on specializing in pediatrics and working in a children's hospital. In addition to this, I am looking forward to starting a family. I come from a large family with five children, and I see myself wanting this for myself in the future. Overall, I am optimistic about the coming chapters in my life and what they will bring with them." Favorite subjects - AP biology, anatomy and physiology. "I say both because they go hand in hand in some ways. The way the human body functions, changes and heals fascinates me. From the network of veins and arteries running through our bodies, to the chromosomes found in our DNA, to the defense mechanisms used to fight off pathogens, the human body proves to be nothing less than a masterpiece." Favorite book - "The Help." Favorite musician - "I love country music, with 90s and early 2000s being my favorite of all." Role model - "My mother has always been a huge role model to me. She has sacrificed so much for my brothers and I, and there's not a day that goes by that she doesn't remind us how much we are loved whether it be by words or by actions. She is so supportive of me, and without her help I wouldn't be the strong, successful, good hearted person I am without her. In addition to being an outstanding mom, she is also one of the kindest people I have ever met. She is a living breathing representation of, ‘Treat others how you want to be treated.' It doesn't matter if the other person deserves her kindness or not, she is always gives it without expecting anything in return. I can only hope to be as good of a mother and person as her in the future."
CARLYLE: NOAH CROCKER Academic rank - 1 of 73. Sports - Baseball. Academic bio - High Honor Roll; Illinois State Scholar; National Honor Society; Top Math Student at Carlyle (three years). Athletic bio - All-conference and all-area selections. Activities - National Honor Society (president, Carlyle chapter); Future Business Leaders of America (FBLA); Science Club; Spanish Club; Worldwide Youth in Science and Engineering (WYSE) team. College, major - Kaskaskia College for two years, then transfer to achieve a degree in actuarial science. Goal - "I enjoy working with numbers and formulas, so I hope to become a successful actuary." Favorite subject - Math. "I enjoy using formulas and problem-solving techniques to solve complicated equations." Favorite book - The Bible. Favorite musician - Jason Aldean. Role model - "I consider my parents the greatest role models in my life. They are both hard-working and successful individuals."
CARNAHAN: BRYNANT BAILEY Academic rank - 3 of 79. Sports - Football, track and field. Academic bio - SLPS scholar athlete (four years); Principal award for student with great character; Honor Roll (four years); Perfect Attendance award 2019. Athletic bio - Football team captain. Activities - Chess club. College, major - Missouri Baptist University, business administration. Goal - "I want to become a coach and become a great leader for students who are still in school and help improve a community." Favorite subject - Mathematics. "I love solving problems, it keeps my mind occupied." Favorite book - "Bluford series: The Bully." Favorite musician - Michael Jackson. Role model - "The challenges my father has been through, he has raised me not to make those same mistakes and to go for my dreams."
CBC: ANDREW WOODMAN Sports - Tennis. Academic bio - Academic Student of the Semester; Gateway Arch Design Challenge Champion. Athletic bio - Class 2 double champion (2017); Class 2 singles third place (2018), fifth place (2016); two-time first team All-Metro; two-time Athletic Student of the Semester. Activities - National Honor Society; Honors Program; Aviation Club; Sts. Joachim and Ann Care Center (volunteer work). College, major - United States Military Academy at West Point, engineering. Goal - "I hope to become a successful U.S. Army aviation officer." Favorite subject - Math. "I am good with numbers and think it can be helpful for an engineering degree." Favorite book - "No Country for Old Men" by Cormac McCarthy. Favorite musician - "Toby Keith." Role model - "I consider my tennis coach, Troy Bray, to be one of my role models because of his honesty, humility, and selflessness. He dedicates so much of his time to the kids he teaches both on and off the court. He has not only turned me into the tennis player I am today, but also into the man I have become."
CHAMINADE: TYLER FOGARTY Sports - Baseball. Academic bio - National Honor Society; National Chinese Honor Society; First Honors Honor Roll. Athletic bio - Two-time first team all-conference; 2018 second team Post-Dispatch All-Metro; 2017 Perfect Game All American Team; ranked 11th in Missouri by Perfect Game for class of 2019; ranked 96th by position by Perfect Game nationally for class of 2019; 2019 Perfect Game second team All-Region. Activities - Esto Vir Ambassador; Father Dempseys Food Outreach; TASK; House Captain; Usher at Our Lady of the Pillar Church; Chinese mentor and tutor. College, major - Notre Dame, engineering. Goal - "Become the best husband, father and be successful with any career that I desire to pursue. If I had to choose right now it would be a professional baseball player." Favorite subject - Math. "It is my best subject and I am always intrigued in the class." Favorite book - "The Hunger Games." Favorite musician - Post Malone. Role model - "My dad because he always helps me achieve my goal of becoming the best person I could possibly be."
CIVIC MEMORIAL: JENNA ROBINSON Academic rank - 27 of 169. Sports - Soccer, tennis. Academic bio - High Honor Roll; National Honor Society; Mu Alpha Theta; Illinois Principals Association award. Athletic bio - Tennis: MVC second team all-conference and team MVP. Soccer: MVC honorable mention all-conference, MVC second team all-conference; IHSA all-state honorable mention. Activities - Class President; Student Council; Spanish Club; Science Club; FreshMentor; Saturday Scholars. College, major - Lewis and Clark Community College, mathematics. Goal - "I hope to be successful in my career in math while also being a role model for the people around me." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "To Kill a Mockingbird." Favorite musicians - Jason Aldean; Post Malone. Role model - "I consider my coaches, teachers, and parents to be my role models because they push me to be my absolute very best every day and encourage me to follow my passions to their full extent. I wouldn't be where I am today without them."
CLAYTON: ANDREW WANG Sports - Cross country, track and field, wrestling. Academic bio - Scored 36 on ACT; Missouri 100 scholar; 2017 Missouri Scholars Academy; Cornell Book Award scholar; National Speech and Debate Association Tournament qualifier (2018); qualified for the TEAMS (Tests of Aptitude, Engineering, Arithmetic, Math, and Sciences) national competition twice, including Best in State in 2017; AP Scholar with Distinction (2018). Athletic bio - Track and field: 3200 relay sectional qualifier (2016, 2017). Cross country: State-qualifying team, including fifth place in 2018. Activities - Academic: speech and debate (elected board member and captain); Mayor's Youth Advisory Council; TEAMS; Science Olympiad. Social: Fantasy Sports Club (co-founder); Ultimate Frisbee Club Team. Volunteer: Clayton Connect; Helping Hounds; Challenger Baseball. College, major - University of Pennsylvania, philosophy, politics and economics. Goal - "I hope to do something that does not only provide for me and my family but for others around me, making a difference in the world. For me, learning became transformative when I realized the concepts that I learned in the classroom applied directly to the problems I saw in the world. Coming from a privileged background, I want to help those who have not had those same opportunities. I had previously thought that I was disadvantaged due to my height (5-1), but I realized that many people were struggling more than me, especially due to my experiences with playing with children with disabilities at Challenger Baseball. I love economics, but I believe it should be used for more than finance. It can be used to create public policy that progresses the world as well." Favorite subject - Economics. "It encompasses all of my interests. It describes people's behaviors, the workings of the economy, and uses both math and social sciences, which are two of my passions. Additionally, from the start, economics had direct applications to my life, from why I stop eating at buffets to why pricing is the way it is. Due to both its utilitarian nature and combining my passions, economics is my favorite subject." Favorite book - "The House of the Spirits." Favorite musician - Lil Uzi Vert. Role model - "I consider my younger brother, Zach, one of my biggest role models. Although he is younger, I admire his passion for others and his dedication to improving himself. When he pursues something, he always completes it but has enough time for others as well."
CLEVELAND: JADIA STACY Academic rank - 9 of 61. Sports - Softball, cheerleading. Academic bio - Honor Roll. Athletic bio - Cheerleading team captain. Activities - Basketball at Marquette Park with kids under age 11; Tutoring for A+ Program. College - Forest Park Community College. Goal - "I want to own my own business, thinking about becoming a funeral director." Favorite subject - Anatomy and Physiology. "It relates to the medical field I am planning to major in." Favorite book - "The Hate U Give" by Angie Thomas. Role model - "My mother is my role model because she is very accomplished despite of the many adverse events she had to face as a young lady."
COLLINSVILLE: ZANE BAKER Academic rank - 55 of 439. Sports - Soccer, basketball. Academic bio - Illinois State Scholar; Honor Roll (four years). Athletic bio - First team all-Southwestern Conference; all-sectional honorable mention; Post-Dispatch athlete of the week (Aug. 24). Activities - Student Council; National Honor Society. College, major - Kansas State, business/finances. Goal - "I hope to become either a financial adviser or auditor in a rather big city." Favorite subject - Statistics. "It applies to my future plans and is pure math, which I love." Favorite book - "The Mamba Mentality" by Kobe Bryant. Favorite musician - Thomas Rhett. Role model - "I consider my parents to be my role models. They continuously sacrifice their own time and money to make sure my brother and I can succeed in school and enjoy athletics. I would not be the same without them."
COLUMBIA: ALEXANDRIA TOUCHETTE Academic rank - 10 of 160. Sports - Softball, basketball, volleyball. Academic bio - Honor Roll (four years); National Honor Society; Illinois State Scholar. Athletic bio - Softball: all-conference (3); all-area (2); All-Metro (3); all-state (3); Athlete of the Week. Basketball: Athlete of the Month; all-conference (2019); all-tournament Candy Cane Classic and Lebanon Christmas Tournament (2018). Activities - Student Council; children's athletic summer camps (softball, basketball, volleyball). College, major - Maryville University, accounting. Goal - "I hope to have a successful accounting career." Favorite subject - Math. "It always provides a new challenge for me to overcome." Favorite book - "Divergent Series" by Veronica Roth. Favorite musician - Kane Brown. Role model - "I consider my parents to be my role models because they have always been there for me, and they always push me to be the best that I can be."
(Page C4)
CONFLUENCE: JAYLA DORA Academic rank - 15 of 105. Sports - Cheerleader, volleyball. Academic bio - Honor Roll. Athletic bio - Volleyball captain; cheerleader-lead. Activities - School store; student government; basketball and football manager. Goal - "I am interested in a career in the dental field." Favorite subject - Math. "Because of the way it engages my mind." Favorite book - "Junie B. Jones" series. Role model - "I consider my older sister (Shanta Bealer) as a role model because she influenced me to be an independent, confident young lady."
COR JESU: TERESA PHILLIPS Sports - Swimming, field hockey, track and field. Academic bio - High Honors (four years); National Latin Exam: Magna Cum Laude (2) and Cum Laude; Annual Catholic Appeal Essay Contest Winner. Athletic bio - Skippy Keefer Scholarship Award nominee; Metro Women's Athletic Association all-conference track and field, swimming and diving. Activities - National Honor Society; Student Council representative; Benin Babies Mission Club; Cor Jesu Tour Guide; CARE Service Club; Camp Circle Star Volunteer. College, major - St. Louis University, physical therapy. Goal - "To always challenge myself to be my best self and to inspire others to do the same by loving unconditionally and showing compassion to one another so that we can all say this world is better because of us." Favorite subject - Science. "It involves critical thinking skills and allows me to explore causes of and solutions to challenges in the world." Favorite book - "Great Gatsby" by F. Scott Fitzgerald. Favorite musician - Florence + the Machine. Role model - "My hero is my 3-year-old niece, Ruthie, who faces daily challenges with joy and perseverance."
CROSSPOINT CHRISTIAN: LYDIA YOUNG Academic rank - 2 of 14. Sports - Volleyball, soccer. Academic bio - Honors in English, history, math, science and Bible. Athletic bio - Volleyball: first team all-conference (three years); first team all-state (three years). Soccer: second team all-state. Activities - Student Council secretary. College, major - Southwest Baptist University, communications. Goal - "I want to use the skills I've learned to aid organizations, companies, and individuals in telling their stories, preserving their values, and achieving their goals." Favorite subject - English. "I love reading and reflecting on classic literature." Favorite book - "To Kill a Mockingbird" by Harper Lee. Favorite musician - Bjear. Role model - "I consider my dad a role model because he works hard at everything he does and is always looking for ways to serve and love others."
CROSSROADS: BLAIRE WILLIAMS Sports - Basketball, soccer, volleyball, tennis, track and field. Academic bio - Upper School Award (sophomore); George Eastman Young Leaders Award (junior). Athletic bio - Basketball: first and second team all-conference. Soccer: first team all-conference (twice); second team all-conference. Activities - Student council (president); student ambassador. College, major - College of William and Mary, public policy. Goal - "I hope to work in the political realm for a while and then work for the FBI or CIA." Favorite subject - History and government. "It is important to me to be an informed citizen, and I learn new things every day that only increase my interest." Favorite book - "The Kite Runner" by Khaled Hosseini. Favorite musician - Johnny Cash. Role model - "I look up to strong women who are hard-working and outspoken."
CRYSTAL CITY: KAILEY KRIEG Academic rank - 4 of 41. Sports - Basketball, softball. Academic bio - Perfect attendance (freshman through junior year); Honor Roll (four years); Principal's Award (two years); Mastodon Science Fair, third place (junior); Twin City Optimist Award (junior). Athletic bio - Basketball: all-conference, all-district (three years). Scored more than 1,000 points. Activities - Student Council; Varsity Club; National Honor Society. College, major - Mineral Area College, criminology or forensics. Goal - "I would love to be a crime scene investigator, or be able analyze the evidence of a crime scene as well." Favorite subject - English. "I love to write and that is one of the only classes where I am able to do that often." Favorite book - "Divergent" by Veronica Roth. Favorite musician - Thomas Rhett. Role model - "I consider my grandma who passed away from leukemia to be my biggest role model. She was overall an amazing person and would do anything for those she loved. She was always positive and was my No. 1 supporter through everything I participated in while growing up. She always found a way to accomplish what she set out to do. If I grow up to be half the person she was, I would be happy with that."
DE SMET: JOSH ABEL Academic rank - 8 of 187. Sports - Hockey, baseball. Academic bio - First Honors (every semester); Presidential education award (3.5 or higher cumulative GPA); Pope Francis I Scholarship award (top 10% of class). Athletic bio - Hockey: member of consecutive Mid-States Challenge Cup runner-up teams; alternate captain (senior season). Baseball: member of Class 4 fourth-place team. Activities - Student Government (four years); student body vice president; Multi-Cultural Awareness Club president; President's Ambassador (three years); mission trips; tutoring; homeless outreach. College, major - Boston College, finance. Goal - "I hope to eventually enter the finance industry and work in investment banking. I hope to have an amazing family and raise my children near a large city. I hope to be able to continue service work with charities as I become an adult." Favorite subject - Math. "I have always loved how numbers work and math has been a great way for me to apply this during school." Favorite book - "Liar's Poker" by Michael Lewis. Favorite musician - Bruno Mars. Role model - "I largely consider Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. one of my role models. I love how he was able to truly stand up for what he believed in no matter what might happen to him. I just hope I will be able to stand up for my beliefs in the same way that Dr. King was able to."
DE SOTO: CLAYTON SNUDDEN Academic rank - 17 of 220. Sports - Football, basketball, baseball. Academic bio - National Honor Society; two-time first team academic all-state; Student of the Year in biology. Athletic bio - Football: National Football Foundation Scholar-Athlete; Character Athlete Award (twice); first team all-region; first team all-conference (twice). Baseball: second team all-district; second team all-conference (twice). Basketball: first team all-district; first and second team all-conference. 2nd Team All-Conference (2018) Activities - Leadership Council; Special Olympics volunteer; Tim Tebow Foundation: Night to Shine volunteer; Upward Basketball coach and referee; Vacation Bible School volunteer; Cabin Leader at Bates Creek Boys Summer Camp; De Soto 5k Winter Flakes volunteer; De Soto Little League umpire; volunteer at Midterm Elections. College, major - College of the Ozarks, nursing. Goal - "I desire a career where I can make a difference, whether it be big or small, in someone's life every day. I enjoy working with people tremendously and in a world filled with pain, we need people willing to try to make a positive impact on people's lives. After achieving my degree in nursing, I plan to pursue a degree as either a physician assistant or a nurse practitioner. Here, I plan to work a successful career of helping and inspiring others." Favorite subject - Science. "I have always been fascinated with the human body and how it works." Favorite book - "Unashamed" by Lecrae. Role model - "Definitely my dad. He has been the rock of our family, and enough cannot be said for how he has provided for our family. For over 20 years he has woken up at 4:30 every morning, Monday through Friday, to go to work to be able to provide for our family, not to mention the many Saturday and Sunday shifts he has had to work. He has shown me through his actions what it means to work hard and sacrifice and serve others. He starting coaching my brother and I's little league team when I was eight and proceeded to coach me all the way up until high school and has coached my little brother every year he has played as well. Additionally, he is the commissioner of Upward Basketball at our church and has been for several years. When the program was still young and lacking leadership, he spent the entirety of all of his Saturdays during the season up at the church coaching several teams, reffing and making sure it all went smoothly. He would drag me along with him, so from a young age, I learned how to serve my church, my community and my God. He pushes me daily to be the best athlete, student, and most importantly, man I can be. Because of him, I know what it takes to be the best husband, father, and community servant I can be."
DUBOURG: MARY NELSON Sports - Basketball, volleyball. Academic bio - First Honor Roll (2015-19); National Honor Society officer; basketball scholar athlete award (2017-18); academic all-state basketball and volleyball (four years). Athletic bio - Basketball: first and second team all-conference; Valley Park Christmas Tournament all-tournament team; Raising Cane's Student Athlete of the Month. Volleyball: first and second team all-conference; first and second team all-district. Activities - Pro-Life Club; Student Ambassadors; Academy of Advanced Studies; club volleyball; DBC Live. College, major - Webster University, elementary education. Goal - "I hope to help the next generation be the best that they possibly can and to help others grow to their full potential." Favorite subject - Biology. "I enjoy learning about how living things function and work together." Favorite book - "The Hate You Give" by Angie Thomas. Favorite musician - Sam Smith. Role model - "My basketball coach and school counselor my freshman year. Mary Kay Brandt. She was always the type of person to put her students and athletes before herself. She set a great example for how I want to reach younger people as I continue to grow older."
DUCHESNE: ALEXANDER KLEITZ Academic rank - 3 of 66. Sports - Cross country, track and field. Academic bio - Bright Flight; National Merit Finalist; National Honor Society. Athletic bio - Cross country: three-time state qualifier and all-conference. Track: three-time sectional qualifier and all-conference. Activities - Band; Key Club; World Youth in Science and Engineering; Academic World Quest; Pit Orchestra; Boy Scouts (Eagle Scout). College - United States Air Force Academy. Goal - "Intelligence officer or space operations officer." Favorite subject - History. "It allows us to understand the present and prepare for the future. Favorite book - "The Brothers Karamazov." Favorite musician - The Beatles. Role model - "Lance Sijan. He was a normal Midwestern boy who brought honor to our country with his heroic and selfless acts to the point of death under fire and in captivity in North Vietnam."
DUPO: SARAH OSTERTAG Academic rank - 1 of 78. Sports - Softball, cheerleading, basketball. Academic bio - National Honor Society; High Honor Roll; Illinois State Scholar. Athletic bio - Softball: all-conference honorable mention. Cheer awards: most improved; team player; coach's award. Activities - Student Council; JROTC; class vice president; head of Socktober. College, major - MacMurray College, elementary education. Goal - "Once I have started working I want to create a space where children feel safe and welcomed to be themselves. One of my goals has always been to create an after-school program for students to go to. I want to do my part in creating a better world for children." Favorite subject - English. "It allows me to explore other ideas and places without having to get out of my chair. I learn ways to analyze myself and the world around me. Through English, I learn more about life, good and bad, before I even experience it." Favorite book - "Diary of an Oxygen Thief." Favorite musician - Ariana Grande. Role model - "My mom is my biggest role model because she has shown me that it doesn't matter how much money you have or who you know, the best part about life is the small things that make you happy. She is the strongest woman I know and is always there to support me."
EAST ST. LOUIS: ELIJAH FELTON Academic rank - 7 of 261. Sports - Football, track and field. Academic bio - Top 10 in senior class. Athletic bio - Three-year varsity football starter; member of 2016 state champion football team. Activities - Fix broken electronics; Gear Up; mentor, tutor, and volunteer with elderly. College, major - Marian University, biology with a concentration in sports medicine. Goal - "I hope to be a change maker, I would like to be a role model for those that follow in my footsteps, and have an impact on the sports medicine field as a black male." Favorite subject - Math. "I love calculating real life problems with numbers; also because math makes the world go around." Favorite book - "Great Expectations" by Charles Dickens. Favorite musician - Kodak Black. Role model - "My role model is my father, who is a former high school athlete that has utilized his skills to help many lost children. He has coached/mentored many athletes that have gone on to pursue athletics on the collegiate and professional platforms."
EDWARDSVILLE: ZACHARY TRIMPE Academic rank - 114 of 616. Sports - Tennis, golf. Academic bio - National Honor Society; National English Honor Society; High Honor Roll. Athletic bio - Tennis: Class 2A state doubles champion (first tennis state winner in Edwardsville history); two-time all-Southwestern Conference player of the year. Golf: two-time state qualifier. Activities - Spanish Club. College - Butler University. Goal - "I hope to become a successful entrepreneur." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "1984." Favorite musician - Kanye West. Role model - "I consider my dad as my role model. I have always admired his work ethic and constant support for me no matter what. He has pushed me to become a better person than I could have imagined."
ELSBERRY: TREVOR ANTHONY Academic rank - 5 of 52. Sports - Football, basketball, baseball. Academic bio - U.S. Presidential Scholars Candidate; Bright Flight; A+ Program; academic team all-conference and all-district; Renaissance Award of Excellence; HOBY Selection; Missouri Boys State. Athletic bio - Football:all-conference and all-district. Basketball: all-district; Mr. Defense/Mr. Swat/Mr. Hustle. Activities - NHS; FFA; Student Senate; FBLA; Student Ambassador; Class Treasurer; Academic Team; Band; Jazz Band; FCA; Speech and Drama; MOYAG; Renaissance Committee; blood drives; operation backpack; Salvation Army bell ringing. College, major - Missouri S&T, chemical engineering with an emphasis in biochemical engineering. Goal - "I hope to work for any major seed company to research different hybrid seeds and create new seeds to increase higher yields." Favorite subject - Math. "I like using numbers, fractions, decimals and so much more. Math is also used in the real world like telling time, adding, dividing, percentages and even in a future career like engineering, and much more." Favorite book - "Animal Farm." Favorite musician - Luke Combs. Role model - "My parents. They have taught me how to overcome adversity and be the strongest person I can be."
EUREKA: MEGAN MOLL Sports - Softball, soccer. Academic bio - Renaissance (4.0+ GPA; four years); first team academic all-state softball (four years); first team academic all-state soccer (three years). Athletic bio - Softball: first team All-Metro (2018); second team All-Metro (2017); first team Class 4 all-state (two years); first team all-conference (two years); conference player of the year (2017); career school records for RBI, home runs, stolen bases; single-season school records for runs (2018), RBI (2017), home runs (2017). Soccer: member of Class 4 championship team (2017), Class 3 third-place team (2018) and Class 4 quarterfinal team (2016); second team Class 4 all-state (2018); first team all-conference (2018). Activities - National Honor Society; softball camps as volunteer instructor; helped sandbag downtown Eureka and Eureka High both years Eureka flooded. College, major - Missouri, chemistry with an emphasis in medicinal chemistry. Goal - "My long-term career goal is to become an orthopedic surgeon. Within the next four years, I plan to earn a bachelor's degree in chemistry with emphasis in medicinal chemistry from the University of Missouri; additionally, I intend to earn a minor in business. With these educational credits, I will continue the pursuit of my goal and enroll in medical school. Once I have become an orthopedic surgeon, I plan to work in a hospital to gain experience and perfect my craft for a few years. Eventually, my goal is to run and operate my own private practice." Favorite subject - Chemistry. "It is very interesting to understand how things work at a molecular level. I also enjoy the math associated with chemistry. Labs are also super cool because I can see in real life what we are learning about." Favorite book - "Ruthless" by Carolyn Lee Adams. Role model - "My mom is my role model. She is extremely determined and diligent in everything she does; her work ethic is unparalleled. At the same time however, she has one of the biggest hearts in the world and she is the best mother anyone could ask for. She encourages me to work hard in everything I do."
FATHER MCGIVNEY: EMMA DEIST Sports - Volleyball, soccer. Academic bio - High Honor Roll (four years); National Honor Society; Illinois State Scholar; Silver Medallion Excellence Award; Academic letter with gold bars. Athletic bio - Volleyball: member of Prairie State Conference champion, Class 1A Mount Olive Regional champion and Class 1A Valmeyer sectional champion; first team all-conference (2018). Activities - House leader; Student Ambassador; Math Team; Model U.N. President/founder; Science Olympiad; Botball; Scholar Bowl; Catholic Athletes for Christ; Celtic Crew. Volunteer: Metro East Humane Society, Watershed Nature Center, Rise Against Hunger, New Student Orientation, Restore Decor Furniture Shop, St. Mary's Parish Picnic, FMCHS School and Dinner Auction, Mosaic Pregnancy Center, Restore Decor Furniture Shop, FMCHS Freshman-Sophomore Summer Volleyball League. College, major - Truman State University; agricultural sciences and biology (pre-veterinary studies). Goal - "I hope to become a wildlife/zoological veterinarian and perform research around the world which will aid in global conservation efforts. Protecting endangered species and ecosystems is very important to me, and I wish to educate others on the importance of caring for the environment. Outside of my career, I want to grow into the best version of myself, and lead a joyous, fulfilling life with my family." Favorite subject - Biology. "I love getting to learn more about the scientific processes that we take for granted but are essential to our everyday lives." Favorite book - "Little Women" by Louisa May Alcott. Favorite musicians - Mumford and Sons; Coldplay; John Denver. Role model - "My parents are far and away the best role models in my life. They inspire me to give 100 percent effort to my passions, demonstrate the importance of hard work and dedication, and show extraordinary kindness and compassion to everyone around them. Simply put, they are wonderful people, and I hope to one day be like them."
FESTUS: MAXWELL MCDANIEL Sports - Cross country, track and field. Academic bio - Renaissance; Honor Roll; cross country and track Scholar Athlete; Wendy's Heisman State Finalist; Rotary Club December Student of the Month. Athletic bio - Cross country: Class 3 individual champion (2018) and runner-up (2017); four-time Class 3 state champion; 2017 Post-Dispatch All-Metro runner of the year; KJFF runner of the year; four-time STL Track Club all-metro team. Track and field: all-state in 1600 and 3200. Activities - National Honor Society; Fellowship of Christian Athletes; Leader of cross country and distance track teams; Relay for Life team captain. Volunteer: Our Lady Catholic Church rEcess Program; Ozark Food Pantry. College, major - Bradley University, physical therapy. Goal - "When I become an adult, I intend on being a contributing member within my community. I also plan on being a positive influence and providing care and guidance to anyone who needs it. I aim to become a physical therapist so that I may ease the pain of anyone who needs it." Favorite subject - Science. "The development of technology that scientists invent every year engages and inspires me. The research and creation of new medicines and practices also provides me with knowledge about my future career in physical therapy." Favorite book - "Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire." Favorite musician - Mumford and Sons. Role model - "My cross country coach, Coach Wright, is one of the biggest role models within my life. Coach Wright has helped to strengthen my relationship with Jesus Christ by influencing prayer before every race and team dinner. While never doubting me, he has inspired me to go after goals that only he knew I could accomplish. From training me into a better athlete, to helping me through my many hardships, and forming me into a more trustworthy and disciplined person, Coach Wright proves to be a huge blessing within my life."
FORT ZUMWALT EAST: MACIE FARRIER Academic rank - 35 of 270. Sports - Basketball, volleyball, track and field. Academic bio - Honor Roll; 4.06 GPA; all-conference all-academic; Highest Academic Honor Pin. Athletic bio - St. Charles County Amateur Sports Hall of Fame honorable mention; all-conference Sportsmanship Award (junior, senior years); track and field school records (javelin, 400-meter relay); member of girls basketball team with most wins and first winning season in school history. Activities - Modulation Z (competitive indoor drumline); NHS; PPI (Fort Zumwalt's Positive Peer Influence Program); A+ (special education buddy); Leader in Me League (mentor to elementary students). College, major - Maryville University, nursing. Goal - "I would ideally like to be a nurse and have a little family, but life is crazy so no matter what my ultimate goal is to be Jesus-loving, kind and helpful person no matter where life takes me." Favorite subject - Science. "As a future nurse, I love my human anatomy and physiology class where we learn all about the human body and its functions." Favorite book - "I love reading mystery and romance novels." Favorite musicians - Andy Mineo; Lecrae Role model - "I consider my parents to be my biggest role models. They have instilled so many life lessons in me and I definitely wouldn't be where I am now without their constant love and support. They are the hardest-working people I know and they have so much grace and patience. I would just like to thank them for everything they have done for me and my sisters throughout the years. I love them so much and I am blessed to have them as my parents!"
FORT ZUMWALT NORTH: COLE SUTTON Academic rank - 15 of 338. Sports - Soccer, track and field, cross country. Academic bio - Academic all-conference and all-state; Bright Flight; Honor Roll. Athletic bio - First team all-conference track and cross country; second team all-conference soccer; track state qualifier; track conference champion (1600 and 3200). Activities - NHS; TSA; PPI; League of Leaders. College, major - University of Kansas, architecture. Goal - "I hope to create and work at my own architecture firm." Favorite subject - Drafting. "Because the teacher is fantastic and I get to work on really cool and fun projects." Favorite book - "Enders Game." Favorite musician - Matchbox Twenty. Role model - "My grandpa, because he is who I hope to be like when I grow up."
FORT ZUMWALT SOUTH: EJ BELLINGER Academic rank - 47 of 327. Sports - Basketball. Academic bio - Honor Roll. Athletic bio - MBCA Class 5 all-state (2018, 2019); All-USA Missouri first team (2018-19); GAC Central player of the year (2018, 2019); GAC Central all-conference first team (2017, 2018, 2019); GAC Central all-academic team (four years); Post-Dispatch All-Metro Team; Union Tournament Most Valuable Player (2019). Activities - Leadership League. College, major - Belmont University, business. Goal - "To attain a degree in business, succeed at playing basketball at the collegiate level and be successful in the business world." Favorite subject - Calculus. Favorite book - "The Great Gatsby" by F. Scott Fitzgerald. Favorite musician - Drake. Role model - "My parents are my role models and number one fans. Through their guidance, love, and support, they have instilled in me the importance of having good morals, and a strong work ethic. My parents have taught me to be confident and to always lead by example."
FORT ZUMWALT WEST: MADELINE WIESEMAN Academic rank - 60 of 464. Sports - Cross country, basketball, track and field. Academic bio - GAC all-academic team; Honor Roll; Academic Letter; graduating Summa Cum Laude. Athletic bio - GAC all-conference (cross country, basketball, track and field); FZW track distance athlete of the year (2016, 2017, 2018); Coach's Excellence Award (cross country); GAC Sportsmanship Award (basketball); track and field state qualifier (three years); cross country team state qualifier. Activities - "Leader In Me" Leadership League; A+ student program; FZW basketball camp; mentor/volunteer. College - Central Methodist University. Goal - "I hope to take the skills and lessons I have learned to become successful in whatever path I choose. I also hope to have a family and be a good role model, sharing the valuable lessons I've learned in the classroom and in my sports." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "The Great Gatsby" by F. Scott Fitzgerald. Favorite musicians - Imagine Dragons; Zac Brown Band. Role model - "My parents are my biggest role models. My parents have always supported and encouraged me both in school and in sports. I admire their hard work and dedication and I have learned how to be a kind and caring person by watching their example. I am the person I am today because of them."
FOX: LUKE JOGGERST Academic rank - 2 of 412. Sports - Football, wrestling. Academic bio - Score of 35 on ACT; National Football Foundation St. Louis Chapter scholar athlete; Bright Flight; A-honor roll all 4 years; QuestBridge national college match finalist; graduating Summa Cum Laude; dual-enrollment in Fox High School and Jefferson College; Associate of Arts degree from Jefferson College; graduating Summa Cum Laude from Jefferson College; Jefferson College Dean's list (two years); academic all-state football (two years); four academic awards for wrestling. Athletic bio - Wrestling: 2019 state qualifier. Football: 2018 first team all-conference offensive and defensive lineman; 2018 My Missouri Info Football Dream-Team selection. Activities - Youth Leader in church youth group (ZAP); senior class secretary; DECA; National Honor Society; Phi Theta Kappa; College Accelerated Program; District Student Advisory Council; counselor at church summer camp (KOV). College, major - Washington University, biology and anthropology. Goal - "I hope to be a strong man of God, have a close family and be a successful doctor." Favorite subject - Biology. "I love learning about the science behind life." Favorite book - "The Bible." Favorite musician - Imagine Dragons. Role model - "I consider my parents to be my role models. They have been there for me through everything and taught me how to be the best I can be while giving the glory to God."
(Page C5)
FRANCIS HOWELL: EMILY EBERWINE Academic rank - 28 of 444. Sports - Lacrosse, softball, wrestling. Academic bio - National Honor Society (2015-present); Honor Roll (2015-present); three-time softball academic all-conference (2016-2018); wrestling outstanding academic achievement and academic all-conference (2019). Athletic bio - St. Charles Female Senior Athlete of the Year nominee (2019). Softball: district championship (2016, 2017); state semifinal appearance (2017); second team all-district (2016, 2018) and second team all-conference (2016). Wrestling: first female state medalist at Francis Howell (2019); fourth-place medal at 126 pounds (2019). Lacrosse: third team all-conference (2016, 2017). Activities - Fellowship of Christian Athletes leader; Small Business Owner: E^2 Bows (2018-present); volunteer in preschool ministry at Waypoint Church. College, major - Truman State, exercise science (pre-med). Goal - "I want to have a job where I get to work with athletes recovering from injury." Favorite subject - Math. "I'm not the greatest at it, but I like the way it challenges my brain. I also like how there is a concrete answer for each problem, nothing is left to interpretation." Favorite book - "Flowers for Algernon." Favorite musician - Jon Bellion. Role model - "My biggest role models are my parents. My mom has a heart for everyone. I've never seen anyone unconditionally love people the way she does. And my dad is incredibly focused and committed to success. Both of them do everything they can to give me and my sister opportunities to learn and experience things that will help us in life."
FRANCIS HOWELL CENTRAL: YANIAH CURRY Academic rank - 28. Sports - Basketball, track and field. Academic bio - National Honor Society; 4.0 GPA (four years); all-academic team. Athletic bio - Player of the year; first team all-district; all-state; offensive player of the year; defensive player of the year; Ultimate Spartan award. Activities - Central International Club; Arete; Principals Council; MAC scholar leader; National Spanish Honor Society. College - University of Toledo. Goal - "I hope to become an entrepreneur and eventually establish a nonprofit organization that seeks to do mission work in multiple countries." Favorite subject - Spanish. "I love learning about other cultures and languages to be able to communicate with different people." Favorite book - "The Hate you Give." Favorite musician - Michael Jackson. Role model - "I consider my parents as my role models because of the way they love and have built their life serving others as well as chasing after their own dreams."
FRANCIS HOWELL NORTH: DILLON LAUER Academic rank - 35 of 392. Sports - Football, wrestling, volleyball. Academic bio - 4.0 GPA; Honor Roll (four years); all-academic (three years). Athletic bio - Wrestling: 2019 team MVP; state qualifier (2017); most improved (2017); conference sportsmanship (2018); Athlete of the Month (December 2018). Activities - National Honor Society; Mentors (two years); Student Cabinet; Leadership Council; Goonies Student Section. Goal - "I would like to be an athletic director and hopefully influence the lives of many athletes/students." Favorite subject - History. "I love learning about the past and it's a very broad subject and includes some of my favorite topics in psychology, government and World War 2." Favorite book - "Diary of a Wimpy Kid." Favorite musician - Nickelback. Role model - "My dad because he's at all my meets and tournaments and knows how to keep me relaxed and ready to go."
FREEBURG: ADAM HAAS Academic rank - 6 of 158. Sports - Soccer, baseball, basketball. Academic bio - Illinois State Scholar; National Honor Society; Rotary Club Student of the Month; WYSE Academic Team. Athletic bio - Soccer: all-state honorable mention; all-Mississippi Valley Conference team. Activities - Eagle Scout (Boy Scouts of America); Student Council; Model United Nations; Spirit Club vice president; Fellowship of Christian Athletes; Spanish Club. College, major - University of Alabama, finance. Goal - "I hope to have a successful career as a personal financial adviser. I also aspire to be a great family man and to keep a strong dedication to my faith." Favorite subject - History. "I love learning about the events in the past that shaped our society. Plus my history teachers are some of my favorite teachers in my school." Favorite book - "Ranger's Apprentice" by John Flanagan. Favorite musicians - Rae Sremmurd; SavageRealm. Role model - "My role model is my grandfather. He earned everything he had through hard work and achieved anything he set his mind to. He also showed kindness to every person he met."
GATEWAY STEM: AIGNER WILLIAMS Academic rank: 27 of 228. Sports - Track and field, cross country. Academic bio - Honor Roll; 21 ACT Club and Up; Principals Award. Athletic bio - Rookie of the year. Activities - STARS mentoring; SLPS Fire and EMS academy; HEC Upward Bound College Prep Program; JROTC, 2016-2017; Abbott Internship; Barnes Internship; indoor track and field for two years; AAU track and field for three years. College, major - Maryville University, nursing. Goal - "I want to become a traveling nurse practitioner providing free or low medical services to low income families." Favorite subject - Science. Favorite book - "Black Summer." Favorite musical group/musician - Ella Mai. Role model - "I consider my mother a role model because she went to school part time while working full time to obtain her associate's degree while also battling health issues. She motivates me and my siblings to go to college also."
GIBAULT: KARSON HUELS Academic rank - 2 of 56. Sports - Basketball, soccer. Academic bio - First honors all four years; National Honor Society; Illinois State Scholar; The Oerter Banquet for Student Recognition for Outstanding Academic Achievement. Athletic bio - Sophomore soccer: IHSSCA Section 12 all-sectional; junior soccer: Chicago Land all-state team, second-team Post-Dispatch All-Metro, IHSSCA Section 12 all-sectional; senior soccer: All-state team IHSSCA, Chicago Land All State Team, third-team All-Metro. Senior basketball: IBCA second-team all-state; Vernie Moffitt Award: Gibault athlete of the year, 2017-2018. Activities - Student Activity Board member; Gibault girls soccer team manager. College, major - McKendree University, nursing. Goal - "I hope to become a successful, hardworking and helpful nurse. I also wish to coach in my free time at the high school or college level." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "Hunger Games." Favorite musical group/musician - Luke Combs. Role model - "I consider both of my parents a role model to me because they are both extremely hard working people who are constantly making others around them better people."
GRANDVIEW: NOAH RICHARDSON Academic rank - Summa Cum Laude. Sports - Baseball, track and field, basketball. Academic bio - 79th Session of Missouri Boys State Representative; JCAA academic all- conference; Honor Roll; President's Education Awards Program; Outstanding Academic Excellence; Mineral Area Mathematics Teachers Association 11th Grade Division I. Athletic bio - Perry County School District Character Athlete (2016); Eagle P.R.I.D.E. (Passion, Resilience, Integrity, Dedication, Effort) award recipient (2019) for basketball; 2017 all-state triple jump; three-time state triple jump qualifier. Activities - Student Council president; senior class president; National Honor Society; FCCLA (three years); Fellowship of Christian Athletes (three years); yearbook. College, major - Missouri S&T, computer engineering. Goal - "I want to live a happy life, whether it is through financial success or just spending time with the people I love. I hope to accomplish something that benefits the public and makes the community a better place." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "Live, Love, Explore" by Leon Logothetis. Favorite musical group/musician - Shinedown. Role model - "Elon Musk is someone who has accomplished many of the things I could only dream of. He is a very inspiring and successful entrepreneur."
GRANITE CITY: ANDREW O'KEEFE Academic rank: 16 of 460. Sports - Cross country, track and field. Academic bio - Academic letter; Secondary Honors Program member. Athletic bio - Two-time Illinois Indoor Prep Top Times 1600 champion; IHSA state track and field 1600 runner-up; six-time all-Southwestern Conference honoree; multiple St. Louis Track Club All-Metro runner. Activities - NHS, Varsity Club; Fellowship of Christian Athletes; Homecoming Court; May Carousel Court; Brighter Futures Group. College, major - Adams State University, earth science. Goal - "I would love to be a conservation officer or national park ranger when I am an adult or if not just to find a fulfilling job in the outdoors." Favorite subject - Biology. Favorite book - "The Hobbit" by J.R.R. Tolkien. Favorite musical group/musician - The Grateful Dead. Role model - "My coach, Sam Nesbit, is a big role model to me. Sam has taught me a lot of what I know about running and about life. Sam is a humble man and very content. Every problem we face in training he approaches with the best attitude and we get through it together. He's taught me to be content with where I am and be hopeful for the future. I would never be where I am now or be the person I am without him. I hope that I can make him proud."
GREENVILLE: ALLYSON CANTRILL Academic rank: 15 of 128. Sports - Volleyball, basketball, soccer. Academic bio - Summa Cum Laude; National Honor Society. Athletic bio - Wendy's Heisman Award; all-conference basketball (three years); all-conference volleyball (two years); all-conference soccer. Activities - Pep Club; volunteer in church nursery; participate in high school Give Back Day (community service projects). College, major - Missouri Baptist University, health sciences. Goal - "To be a physical therapist." Favorite subject - Biology and anatomy. Favorite book - "The Fault in our Stars" by John Green. Favorite musical group/musician - Taylor Swift. Role model - "My dad because he taught me how to play sports and always encouraged me to work hard in my athletics and academics."
HANCOCK: MESSIAH MOULTRIE Academic rank - 10 of 101. Sports - Basketball, soccer, track and field, golf. Academic bio - Tiger Choice Award Recipient; National Honor Society; Tri-M Music Honors Society; International Thespian Society. Athletic bio - Basketball: all-conference (two years); all-district. Activities - Varsity H letterman's club; senior class Student Council Vice President; Spotlight Players Theater Club. College, major - Missouri S&T, civil engineering. Goal - "I hope to become successful in my field of work and use my knowledge to find innovative new ways to create infrastructure." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "The Great Gatsby." Favorite musician - Martin Garrix. Role model - "In my opinion, LeBron James is a great role model. Although I don't plan on pursuing a career in basketball like he did, I admire his success, responsibility with that success and his dedication to his family."
HAZELWOOD CENTRAL: AMANDA HEI Academic rank - 26 of 439. Sports - Swimming, cross country. Academic bio - Student of the month; Kids on the Move; Honor Roll; over 200 community service hours. Athletic bio - Swimming:Florissant Fish swim team for 13 years, captain two years; HEAT Swim team for 13 years, captain two years; Ozark Swimming athlete representative (lead representative on Officials Committee); North County Municipal swim league conference record holder for four years; state qualifier for four years; state finalist for three years; all-conference award in 9th and 11th grade; Aquaman award: fastest 50 freestyle all four years; Submariner award (most points for the team all four years); Hawk award 2018-2019. Cross country: all-conference twice; Sportsmanship award. Activities - National Honor Society. College, major - UMSL, early childhood and special education. "For as long as I can remember I have wanted to follow in my mom's footsteps in becoming a teacher. My goal is to student teach in North St. Louis County and ultimately teach in a North St. Louis County school district. I want to give back to the community where I was born and raised." Goal - "I hope to become an early childhood/special educator to help young children learn and achieve." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest." Favorite musician - Queen. Role model - "My parents. Throughout my life, they have always encouraged me to be respectful, have a strong work ethic and stay determined. They have helped shape who I am today from the value they have taught me, and inspire me to improve myself every day."
HAZELWOOD EAST: JANNAH HARRIS Academic rank - 34 of 241. Sports - Basketball, track and field, softball. Academic bio - First-place state qualifier in DECA two years in a row; third-place qualifier for Nationals in DECA; Academic Honor Award for basketball. Athletic bio - Basketball: academic all-conference; captain. Activities - FCCLA Treasurer; volunteer at an animal clinic; DECA; Special Olympics volunteer; Student Council. College, major - University of Missouri, pre-veterinary medicine. Goal - "As I reach adulthood, I wish to be successful, and to me, success is not measured by how much money you have or how famous you are. In my opinion, success is measured by your own personal happiness. I also want to be an established traveling veterinarian as an adult, and provide low-cost healthcare for animals in low-income households." Favorite subject - English, creative writing. Favorite book - "Fahrenheit 451" by Ray Bradbury. Favorite musician - Eric Bellinger. Role model - "The most influential role model in my life has to be my mom. Not only does she inspire me by being the wonderful woman that she is, but she also pushes me to be the best version of myself possible. She believes in me probably more than I believe in myself. She has been there for me when I feel like I have been knocked back two steps, just to push me 10 steps forward. She is such a blessing to me, and I give all credits to my success to her."
HAZELWOOD WEST: ALEXANDRIA CAFOLLA Academic rank - 3 of 504. Sports - Softball. Academic bio - Bright Flight Scholar; Department Award (Practical Arts, Social Studies, Math, English, PE/Health); Teachers Choice Award (three years); Best of West Academic Award (3.7 GPA or higher, three years); perfect attendance (three years); Math Student of the semester; Letter of Recognition from MEMC Corporation; Webster University Webster Gold Scholarship. Athletic bio - All-Academic (three years); first team all-conference (three years); all-conference player of the year; first team all-district (three years); second team all-region (three years); Athlete of the Week; third team All-Metro; team captain; Sportsmanship Award; Wildcat Award; MHSFCA Class Four Scholarship. Activities - National Honor Society (three years); Technology Student Association; Boeing Design Challenge team; Special Olympics volunteer; Elementary School tutor; Hazelwood Parks Department volunteer; assistant 12U fastpitch softball coach. College, major - Webster University, pre-engineering dual degree program. Goal - "I hope to become a licensed industrial engineer and a successful fastpitch softball coach." Favorite subject - PLTW engineering. Favorite book - "Jane Eyre" by Charlotte Bronte. Favorite musician - Dustin Lynch. Role model - "My mother is my role model. She has promoted teamwork and the importance of never giving up. My mom is always there for others and fills your day with kindness. She brings a smile to everyone's face when she walks into a room."
HERCULANEUM: EMILY ENGHAUSER Academic rank - 2 of 103. Sports - Cross country, track and field. Academic bio - Rotary Student of the Month; Student of the Quarter; leadership academy; completed almost an entire year's worth of credit hours in college while still being in high school. Athletic bio - Cross country: all-conference (four years); all-district (three years); all-state (three years, individual and team). Track and field: all-state in 3200-meter relay. Activities - Student Council; National Honor Society; Blackcat Buddies; A+ Tutoring; Varsity Letterman's Club; choir; chamber choir; theatre musical program. Volunteer: church nursery; worship team. College, major - Maryville University, early childhood education with a certification in special education. Goal - "I hope to become a caring, compassionate teacher, wife, mother, and business owner. I hope to start an animal sanctuary and be involved in my church." Favorite subject - History. Favorite book - "The Future of Us" by Jay Asher and Carolyn Mackler. Favorite musician - Billie Eillish. Role model - "I consider Martin Luther King Jr. to be a role model because of his peaceful approach to a devastating subject, and his influence on the population to treat everyone as equals."
HERMANN: EMMA GODAT Academic rank - 6 of 75. Sports - Volleyball, basketball. Academic bio - Academic all-conference and all-state; top 10 percent of class; Honor Roll; National Honor Society. Athletic bio - Basketball: Sixth Man of the year, all-district 2019. Activities - Future Business Leaders of America President and Treasurer; Student Council; Fellowship of Christian Athletes; National Honor Society: Family, Career, and Community Leaders of America; volunteer for several events held by St. George church; Special Olympics volunteer. College, major - Maryville University, physical therapy, minor in psychology. Goal - "Once I graduate from Maryville, I am hoping to be a physical therapist in a children's hospital and work with children who have disabilities or illnesses." Favorite subject - Calculus. Favorite book - "To All the Boys I've Loved Before" by Jenny Han. Favorite musician - Scotty McCreery. Role model - "The biggest role model I have in my life is my mom. She has taught me so many life lessons that I will be able to use in the future. I have learned how to be a kind and loving person because of her. Along with teaching me great things, she has always been my number one supporter in everything I do. I hope to be a lot like her when I get older!"
HIGHLAND: KATE MARTI Academic rank - 1 of 236. Sports - Basketball, soccer, cross country, track and field. Academic bio - IHSA honorable mention all-academict; Outstanding AP U.S. History Award; top 1% English Award; two top 1% Foreign Language Awards; Illinois State Scholar. Athletic bio - Cross country: state qualifier (2015, 2018); Track: fourth-place finish in 800-meter relay at state (2016); leadership award (2018); Basketball: third in state (2016); Soccer: honorable mention all-sectional team; first team all-conference; MVP (2017). Activities - Vice President of Future Medical Careers Club; Class President; Vice President of Principal's Advisory Committee; Fellowship of Christian Athletes; Special Olympics volunteer; Leaps of Love; the Optimist; the Moose Lodge; National Honor Society; Spanish Club. College, major - Maryville University, nursing. Goal - "Eventually, I hope to be an acute care nurse practitioner in the emergency room. Favorite subject - Anatomy. Role model - "My parents are my role models because they are both smart and successful, and it seems like they always know the right thing to do, and they always have the best advice."
HILLSBORO: ISAAC READNOUR Academic rank - 62 of 262. Sports - Basketball, soccer, track and field. Academic bio - National Honor Society. Athletic bio - HHS Crown Athlete of the Month for September 2017; Soccer: 110% Hawk Award; Blake Duckworth Sportsmanship Award 2017; 2018 Hillsboro all-tournament team, first team all-conference (2017, 2018); first team all-district (2017, 2018); district championship (2016): Basketball: conference championship (2018, 2019); district championship (2018, 2019); Track: conference championship (2018); district championship (2018); JCAA MVP (2018); member of Team Missouri for the Great Southwest Regional Meet in Albuquerque; state qualifier for triple jump. Activities - Choir; Student Council; Wing team; National Honor Society Treasurer; sixth grade mentor in Art of Manliness; Hillsboro soccer and basketball camp assistant; Character Breakfast. College, major - Maryville University, secondary education-biology. Goal - "I hope to become a high school science teacher and coach track and field after college." Favorite subject - Science. Favorite book - "Legend" by Marie Lu. Favorite musician - Khalid. Role model - "My role model is my dad because he is a respectable, hardworking man that everyone around him looks up to. He is the principal of Hillsboro Intermediate School and works to make a good impact and connection with every kid who comes through his school. He is the most helpful and caring person I know. He makes time for his family and our activities while making an effort to support the students in his building."
(Page C6)
HOLT: JAKE RYAN Academic rank - 6 of 398. Sports - Football, basketball. Academic bio - Principal A Honor Roll each semester; Academic All-State for football and basketball; Holt Student of the Month, March 2016. Athletic bio - Football:second team all-conference-defensive back; Lou Fusz Athlete of the Month: Basketball: St. Dominic all-tournament team-2018. Activities - Holt LEAD program; National Honor Society; Holt PEP Club; DECA; Holt Tribe Leader-2019. College, major - University of Missouri, economics. Goal - "I hope to become a financial analyst after majoring in economics. I would love to eventually serve as a member of the United States Congress." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "Ripper" by Stefan Petrucha. Favorite musician - Drake. Role model - "My dad is my role model because he is the hardest worker I know and would do anything for his family."
INCARNATE WORD: EMILY SCHROEDER Academic rank - 1 of 78. Sports - Swimming. Academic bio - Valedictorian; First Honors (four years), St. Michael's College Book Award (2018). Athletic bio - First team all-conference (four years); all-state honorable mention as a junior and senior. Activities - National Honor Society; Student Ambassadors; IWA Philanthropy Club; IWA Family Leaders; "I also cofounded a charity with my friend Liz Goldstein called "Blue For Beth" honoring my mom Elizabeth and her grandmother, who both passed away from colon cancer in 2018." College, major - St. Louis University, chemistry. Goal - "I am not sure exactly what I want to become, but I hope that whatever it is I put everything I have into being the best I can possibly be at it. That being said, as of right now, I think it could be interesting to be a pharmaceutical patent lawyer and help approve new medicines." Favorite subject - Science/chemistry. Favorite book - "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest." by Ken Kesey. Favorite musicians - Travis Scott; Brooks & Dunn. Role model - "My mom is definitely my biggest role model. She was the one that got me involved in swimming. In fact, she was my first swim coach at age 4. My mom was also my first teacher, and from a young age she instilled in me the significance of education. Those things being said, my mom also never let me forget that, ‘People won't remember what time you swam or what grade you got, but they will remember how they made you feel.' She passed away from cancer in March of 2018, but I still think about that quote and strive to live it out every day."
JEFFERSON: ANNA HEACOCK Sports - Track and field, cross country, dance, cheerleading. Academic bio - A honor roll; AB honor roll; Rotary student of the month; academic all-state. Athletic bio - All-state; AAU All-American; USATF All-American; state champion; AAU national champion. Activities - Student council; Fellowship of Christian Athletes; current secretary of Family, Career, and Community Leaders of America; senior class treasurer. College, major - Wichita State University, nursing. Goal - "I hope to one day become a nurse anesthetist. I hope to help a many people as possible in my career." Favorite subject - Anatomy. Favorite book - "Sarah's Key" by Tatiana de Rosnay. Favorite musician - Halestorm. Role model - "My coach, Rich Borman, is my role model. He is one of the kindest people I know. He is constantly doing things for others without anything in return. He is selfless and kind. I hope to one day be like him."
JENNINGS: SHAWANDA MARTIN Academic rank - 4 of 174. Sports - Basketball, volleyball, soccer. Academic bio - Job Readiness Training Program; Certificate of Accomplishment of Virtual Service; Outstanding Community Service; Certificate of Appreciation from the City of Jennings; Completion of UMSL Stem Program; Outstanding Student Leadership; National Career readiness gold level; senior of the month of September. Athletic bio - Sportsmanship of the year for basketball and volleyball; all-conference honorable mention for basketball and soccer. Activities - National Honor Society (vice president); Student Council; DECA president; fundraiser coordinator for JAG; NAF; Academy of Forensic Science; National Science Society. College, major - UMSL, computer science. Goal - "I hope to accomplish my career goals and become a role model to someone younger than me." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "The Hate You Give." Favorite musician - Lil Baby. Role model - "I consider my mom as my role model because I have watched her grow as a woman and mother, and she has always gotten things done no matter the circumstances. She always motivates me to keep my focus and to do what's needed first. Without her, I'm not sure where I would be."
JERSEYVILLE: BROOKE TUTTLE Academic rank - 2 of 174. Sports - Golf, basketball, cheerleading, softball. Academic bio - Illinois State Scholar; National Honor Society; National English Honor Society; Silver Medallion Scholastic Athlete of the Year. Athletic bio - Golf: State qualifier, third place in sectional tournament, Mississippi Valley Conference medalist (2018); Metro East Golf Coaches Association Class 1A all-area team; four-year sectional qualifier; four-year all-conference player. Basketball: 3-point shootout qualifier (freshman); Team Spark Award (junior). Softball: team MVP (sophomore); Best Defensive Player Award (junior). Also: Silver Medallion Scholar Athlete of the Year. Activities - Worldwide Youth Science and Engineering team; Olympiad team; Student Council; Secretary of Blue Crew; Class Council; 15 hours volunteering per semester for National Honor Society. College, major - United States Military Academy at West Point, cybersecurity. Goal - "I hope to one day work for one of the three letter government agencies (CIA, FBI, NSA)." Favorite subject - AP calculus. Favorite book - "American Assassin" by Vince Flynn. Favorite musician - Post Malone. Role model - "My mom because she is strong-willed and a caring mother."
JOHN BURROUGHS: MADISON FULLER Sports - Basketball, track and field. Academic bio - National Merit finalist. Athletic bio - Track: 100- and 200-meter state champion; All-Metro first team; Metro League Athlete of the Year (2016). Basketball: honorable mention All-Metro League (2017, 2019). Activities - BioMedical Sciences Club leader; Friends of Wings Youth Board member; Aim High STL teaching assistant. College - Vanderbilt. Goal - "I would like to lead a very active and productive lifestyle and live my life to the fullest extent. I would also like to make my family and community proud of what they hear about me, as I aspire to be a person recognized for my hard work and dedication, the wonderful things I achieved in high school and the differences I made in the community." Favorite subject - History. Favorite book - "The Handmaid's Tale" by Margaret Atwood. Favorite musician - Maroon 5. Role model - "I consider my grandfather my role model because he has always pursued everything he has set his mind to relentlessly and with full dedication. His stories, advice and positivity continuously inspire me."
KIRKWOOD: CASEY NASH Academic rank - 1 of 426. Sports - Volleyball. Academic bio - National Merit finalist; National AP Scholar; Harvard Book Award. Activities - Mock Trial (second at state); Model UN; Youth in Government; Conference on National Affairs; Class Office; Young Democrats. Goal - "I want to travel the world and experience as many people and cultures as I can." Favorite subject - English. Favorite book - "Their Eyes Were Watching God" by Zora Neale Hurston. Favorite musician - JPEGMAFIA. Role model - "My father, who has been a constant presence for my family and me for the entirety of my life."
LADUE: MOSES OKPALA Sports - Basketball, football. Academic bio - Four-time all-academic honors for basketball; Honor Roll. Athletic bio - Football: three-time first team all-conference defensive lineman; first team all-conference offensive lineman; second team all-state defensive end; first team all-state defensive end; first team All-Metro defensive lineman. Basketball: two-time defensive player of the year; all-conference sportsmanship award (2018); Mack Brown Sportsmanship Award. Activities - FCA leader (2016-2019); National Honor Society (2017-2019); Maccabi World Food Drive (2017). College, major - University of Illinois, psychology. Goal - "I hope to become a lawyer one day, and with my power, I'll help underprivileged people." Favorite subject - AP psychology. Favorite book - "Kite Runner" by Khaled Hosseini. Favorite musician - Bob Marley. Role model - "In terms of sports, I like JJ Watt because of his drive and dominance on the football field and how he has a will to help people outside the football field. In terms of life, I like the story and life of Nelson Mandela: the purpose of his whole life was to help people, even though it jeopardized his life."
LAFAYETTE: ELLIE SCHILLING Sports - Track and field. Academic bio - AP Scholar with Distinction; Gold Renaissance; Bright Flight. Athletic bio - Most outstanding field athlete; all-conference; all-district; all-sectional; state qualifier; school record for pole vault. Activities - Key Club steering committee and executive board; National Honor Society; Student Council; Grade Level Advisory; Special Olympics: buddy and track official; Mu Alpha Theta; Mercy TLC volunteer; church volunteer. College, major - Maryville University, biology/biochemistry for pre-med. Goal - "I hope to become an orthopedic sports medicine doctor so I can help future athletes." Favorite subject - Science. Favorite book - "Catcher in the Rye" by J.D. Salinger. Favorite musician - Julia Michaels. Role model - "I consider my coaches to be my role models as they have encouraged me and pushed me to achieve my goals, teaching me the importance of hard work and determination."
LEBANON: EMILY REINNECK Academic rank - 1 of 42. Sports - Volleyball, basketball, softball. Academic bio - Physical Education Award (2018); high honor roll all four years. Athletic bio - All-conference in volleyball, basketball and softball; All-Metro third team in basketball. Activities - National Honor Society; Student Council; Interact; Art Club; Math Team; Ecology Club; Fellowship of Christian Athletes; church volunteer; youth athletic camps volunteer. College, major - Greenville University, art. Goal - "I plan on trusting God and seeing what he has in store for my future." Favorite subject - Art. Favorite book - "The Bible." Favorite musician - Lauren Daigle. Role model - "My dad has been a big role model in my life. He always puts others' needs before his own and never fails to put a smile on my face."
LIBERTY: ALLANA GUFFEY Academic rank - 5 of 340. Sports - Cross country, swimming and diving, track and field. Academic bio - Healthy Lifestyle (HOSA State Leadership Conference); CAPS Healthcare recipient of the 10th annual EDC (Economic Development Center) STEM Award; academic cross country all-state; Principals Honor Roll; AP Scholar. Athletic bio - Cross Country: all-district, state qualifier. Swimming: four-time conference champion team. Track: all-conference and all-district. Activities - HOSA secretary and past treasurer; National Honor Society; St. Charles County CAPS Healthcare; STEM Summer Camp Counselor. College, major - St. Louis University, biology (pre-med). Goal - "After I graduate college, I hope to attend medical school and become a successful physician." Favorite subject - Anatomy and physiology. Favorite book - "Catch 22" by Joseph Heller. Favorite musician - "Classical rock." Role model - "My biggest role model is my dad. He supports me in everything I do and inspires me to be the best version of myself."
LIFT FOR LIFE: NEEMA SHABAZZ Academic rank - 8. Sports - Basketball. Academic bio - National Honor Society; 3.84 overall GPA; High Honor roll all four years. Athletic bio - Sportsmanship Award; Resilience Award; Scholar-Athlete award; Leadership Captain award. Activities - Reading. College - Missouri State University. Goal - Medical field. Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "Too many to name." Favorite musician - "Too many to name." Role model - "My mom."
LINDBERGH: DAN BAUDENDISTEL Academic rank - 5 of 550. Sports - Soccer, basketball, lacrosse. Academic bio - AP Scholar; Renaissance Lifetime Achievement award. Athletic bio - Lacrosse:second team all-state; Show-Me Cup champion; captain. Soccer: academic all-state; second team all-district; captain. Basketball: academic all-state, captain. Activities - FCA; DECA; Project Self; National Honor Society; Ollie Hinkle Heart Foundation volunteer; Feed the Knowledge volunteer. College, major - University of Notre Dame, neuroscience and behavior. Goal - "As an adult, I hope to go into the medical profession where I can help others. I'm not sure what exactly I want to do, but there is enough flexibility in the medical field that I can choose later." Favorite subject - Psychology. Favorite book - "The Things They Carried" by Tim O'Brien. Favorite musician - Florida Georgia Line. Role model - "My mother. She has taught me the value of a balanced life and shown me that you must work hard to accomplish your goals regardless of how smart you are."
LOVEJOY: CHRISTOPHER ALLEN Academic rank - 3 of 12. Sports - Basketball. Academic bio - Student of the Month; Honor Roll. Athletic bio - Team captain; Most Improved Player. Activities - Student Council. Goal - "I hope to become a productive and successful member of society. I also plan to be a role model to the younger children I know." Favorite subject - Reading. Favorite book - "Education" by Tara Westover. Favorite musician - Kanye West. Role model - "Jesse Woolfork Jr. has been a positive role model since my sophomore year. He has kept me on track since I transferred to Lovejoy. He's made me work harder in the classroom and on the court, holding me to a higher standard than my peers."
LUTHERAN NORTH: JORDYN WHITE Sports - Basketball, track and field, cross country. Academic bio - Honor Roll; High Honor Roll; LHSN Student of the Month (Feb 2018); Maryland Heights Chamber of Commerce Student of the Month (Jan 2019); National Honor Society; Trinity University Trustees' Scholarship recipient. Athletic bio - Basketball: four-year varsity starter; team captain; first team all-conference (2017-2019); 1,000-point scorer. Track: state finalist in long jump, triple jump, 100-meter hurdles. Cross country: 19th-place finish in sectional meet (2018). Activities - PASS Program: (Pioneer Association of Sports and Scholars); elementary/middle school counselor (summer of 2017 & 2018); track maintenance after practice and during track meets; school cleaning/repair over summer break; school basketball camp volunteer; counselor; cross country timekeeper and team manager. College - Trinity University. Goal - "Be a physical therapist or physician's assistant." Favorite subject - English. Favorite book - "Poet X" by Elizabeth Acevedo. Favorite musician - Sam Smith. Role model - "I consider my mom a role model. She has gone through a lot and is so strong. During my end of my sophomore year, my mother was diagnosed with a rare neurological disorder. Although it is incurable, she now takes medicine to relieve the symptoms and lives in a managed care facility. My twin brother and I have adjusted to living away from my mother and she has stayed strong through her entire ordeal. I'm so proud of her. She is my inspiration and my motivation."
LUTHERAN SOUTH: MADELINE RAUH Academic rank - 11 of 119. Sports - Cheerleading, swimming. Academic bio - Honors with Highest Distinction, three years; National Honor Society; May and Paul Poetter Scholarship-Savannah College of Art and Design; Lutheran High School South- Leadership Scholarship. Athletic bio - All-state in Class 1 100-yard butterfly and 200 individual medley (2018, 2019); Wendy's High School Heisman school winner (2018-19); Transplant Games of America (2018, Salt Lake City, seven medals in swimming). Activities - Art Club; Teen Life Council-Children's Hospital, St. Louis; Christian Friends of New Americans volunteer. College, major - Savannah College of Art and Design (SCAD), animation. Goal - "I plan to be an animator, to make a statement with my creativity and impact the world through art and storytelling." Favorite subject - Art. Favorite book - "The Stranger" by Albert Camus. Favorite musician - MGMT. Role model - "My dad is a major role model of mine. He has made great sacrifices for me and my family. He also always supports me in whatever I want to pursue and pushes me to be the best that I can be."
LUTHERAN ST. CHARLES: ZEKE EMERICK Sports - Track and field, cross country. Academic bio - Academic all-state. Athletic bio - Cross country: all-district. Activities - FIRST Robotics team captain; National Honor Society; German Club. College, major - University of Alabama in Huntsville, mechanical engineering. Goal - "I hope to work as a mechanical engineer in the automotive, aerospace, or defense industry." Favorite subject - Principles of Engineering. Favorite book - "Without Remorse" by Tom Clancy. Favorite musician - Def Leppard. Role model - "My robotics mentor, Mr. Zilz. He has taught me many things not just about robotics, but about doing the right thing not just for yourself, but for everyone involved, and living a full and good life."
MADISON: KENDRA REED Academic rank - 1. Sports - Volleyball. Academic bio - National Honor Society; Honor Roll; Principal's Honor Roll; Beta Club Member. Athletic bio - Team captain. Activities - Madison Senior High School Dual Enrollment Student; Gateway Regional Hospital, and a member of the Beta Club. College, major - Lindenwood University-Belleville, pre-med. Goal - "I plan to become a geriatric nurse to assist with the health care of the elderly." Favorite subject - Math. "Only because I catch on to it easily." Favorite book - "Becoming" by Michelle Obama. Favorite musician - Jaheim. Role model - "I consider my mom a role model, because she is a very strong woman that makes things happen no matter what."
MAPLEWOOD-RICHMOND HEIGHTS: CAROLINE BARRON Academic rank - 1 of 74. Sports - Soccer, volleyball, cross country, track and field. Academic bio - 2018 St. Louis County outstanding student leader; 2018 AAUW STEM Girl of Promise; Principal's honor roll. Athletic bio - Soccer: First team all-conference and conference MVP (sophomore and junior). Volleyball: First team all-conference (junior and senior); first team all-district. Track: seventh place in 3200-meter relay. Activities - NHS; WYSE; Thespian troupe 3189; Key club. College, major - Missouri State University, cell and molecular biology. Goal - "As of now I want to be a doctor." Favorite subject - Biology. "I enjoy learning how complex systems in plants and animals work." Favorite book - "Code Name Verity." Favorite musician - Queen. Role model - "I consider both my parents role models because of their constant selflessness and humility."
MARISSA: CASSANDRA CAMPBELL Academic rank - 5 of 52. Sports - Softball, volleyball, cheerleading. Academic bio - High Honor Roll; recognition of Honor Roll by the 99th and 100th General Assembly-House of Representatives; Good Citizen District Level Award by National Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution; Band Proficiency Award; FFA State Level Award 2019; FFA District Level Award; FFA Home & Community Development Entrepreneurship; Proficiency Award; FFA Creed Speaking Award. Athletic bio - Softball: sectional and regional team champion. Volleyball: team co-captain. Cheerleading: Most Improved. Activities - Student Council vice president; National Honor Society president; class vice president; Beta Club; Fellowship of Christian Athletics; FFA: Greenhand officer (freshman); secretary (junior); vice president (senior); M-Club; Spanish Club; Stand for the Silent; club softball; band; spring musical; journalism, yearbook staff; homecoming court; prom court; Girl Scouts Bronze, Silver, Gold, Trifecta Awards. College, major - Western Kentucky University, broadcast meteorology. Goal - "I want to work for a major TV station as a meteorologist/news anchor." Favorite subject - Science. Favorite book - "The Giver." Favorite musician - Ariana Grande. Role model - "My mom, Nanette Campbell, is my role model. She is energetic and always willing to serve others."
MARQUETTE: JAKE HANSEN Sports - Baseball, soccer, basketball. Academic bio - 11-Time Bronze Scholar Athlete; Junior Achievement Competition for Business Management and Entrepreneurship at Fontbonne University; Best Salesman Award in business management and entrepreneur class; Marquette Excellence for individual award and scholarship; Presidents Award for Educational Excellence; 3.5 Cumulative GPA. Athletic bio - Only Sophomore in Marquette history to start in 3 varsity sports (soccer, basketball, baseball); Physical Education Department Award. Soccer: conference and regional player of the year (senior); first team all-state (junior and senior); second team all-state (sophomore). Baseball: honorable mention all-conference (sophomore). Basketball: honorable mention all-conference (senior). Activities - Volunteer:SPENSA (Special Needs Soccer Association); Special Olympics. Leadership council with activities director, varsity baseball; community service class. Goal - "I hope to be a successful businessman as an adult. I also hope to raise a happy, healthy family." Favorite subjects - Math and PE. "I really enjoy PE because I am a very active person who loves to play sports and be in a competitive atmosphere. I also really enjoy math because I find working with numbers and different equations fun and interesting." Favorite book - "The Hunger Games." Favorite musicians - Khalid; NBA YoungBoy; Juice Wrld. Role model - "George Sisler is my role model not only because he is my great, great grandfather, but also because he was one of the greatest baseball players of all time and always treated others with respect and dignity. His nickname was Gentleman George."
MASCOUTAH: CASMIR COZZI Sports - Cross country, track and field. Academic bio - Illinois State Scholar (2019); Memorial Foundation's Scholar Athlete of the Month (2019); October Student of the Month (2018); four-year Academic Letter Winner. Athletic bio - Mascoutah Game Changer Award (November 2017). Cross country: 2018 Class 2A all-state; conference, regional and sectional champion; Post-Dispatch All-Metro selection; four-year all-Mississippi Valley Conference finisher; two-time state qualifier and all-regional finisher; White Letter Recipient (2019); Sportsmanship Award (2016); Newcomer Award (2015). Track and field: Three-time outdoor all-conference; 2018 MVC conference champion in 3200 and runner-up in 1600; sectional champion in 3200 relay and third place in 3200; Class 2A state third place in 3200 relay; IHSA indoor 3200-meter relay state champion (2018) and state qualifier (2019); 1600 fourth-place finisher (2019). Activities - National Honor Society; Boeing Engineering Explore Post communications lead; Student Council; student body vice president (senior year); junior class vice president; Freshman Mentoring Program Coach; Lifesavers Club Group Leader; spring musicals; National Beta Club; Show Choir; Model UN; Saturday Scholars; Catholic Youth Organization; EDGE Youth Group Leader; church volunteer; Boy Scouts of America Member; Eagle Scout. College, major - Benedictine College, mechanical engineering (minor in theology). Goal - "I hope to become an engineer, but another desire of mine is to serve my community and others to the best of my ability." Favorite subject - AP Calculus. "This subject not only pertains to my intended major of mechanical engineering but it challenges me to learn and improve my skills in mathematics." Favorite book - "The Hobbit." Favorite musician - Queen. Role model - "I have so many role models in my life it is very hard to just chose one. However, I do have two ones which immediately come to mind. These are my coach and my father. Both of these men are fundamental people in my life and I spend most of my time between the two of them. Their dedication to their passions inspire me to show the same amount of dedication in what I am passionate about. My coach inspired and inspires me to become a better runner and better person through his example as a dedicated runner himself and an exemplary coach. My dad has contributed to much of my passion for my faith and the high standard to which I hold myself to. Both of these men have a fundamental role in becoming the person I am today."
(Page C7)
MATER DEI: CAYDN SCHUCHMAN Academic rank - 22 of 96. Sports - Basketball, baseball. Academic bio - High Honor Roll; National Honor Society; Math Award. Athletic bio - Baseball: Matt Heinzmann Leadership Award. Basketball: Coaches Award. Activities - National Honor Society; Pep Club. Volunteer: St. Vincent de Paul food pantry; church picnic. College, major - Kaskaskia College, business. Goal - "I hope to accomplish getting my degree in my desired field and then going on to have a successful career in whatever job I choose. I also hope to achieve retirement as an adult when I get to that age. I also hope to become a family man with a wife and children as an adult." Favorite subject - Finite. "It deals with real life situations and how stocks and the stock market works. It helps you understand when and how to buy and sell stocks." Favorite book - "The Hunger Games." Favorite musician - Zac Brown Band. Role model - "I consider my parents as a role model, because they have shown me everything important that I need to know in life. They have showed me how to raise a family and taught me how to be the person I am today. They support me in any decisions that I make and always are willing to help, while also pushing me to do my best. They also know what is right for me and push me in the right direction."
MCCLUER: SOFIA ROBAYO-CAMARGO Academic rank - 1 of 252. Sports - Tennis, swimming, soccer. Academic bio - Gold Card (maintaining 4.0 GPA or above, 2015-2019); Rensselaer Medal Academics; Bausch and Lomb Honorary Science Award; Cornell Book Award; Top-Performing in Math and Science; full tuition Scholarship to Washington University in St. Louis; North County Churches Uniting For Racial Harmony and Justice's Academic Achievement Award (2019). Athletic bio - Tennis: McCluer No. 1 player (two seasons); second place doubles in 2018 McCluer Invitational. Swimming: 2019 conference fourth-place 200 medley relay, 400 freestyle relay, fifth-place 100 breaststroke, sixth-place 200 freestyle relay. Activities - WashU College Prep Program Cohort 3; Ernst & Young College Map; Latino Student Group vice president; Youth Leaders St. Louis. College, major - Washington University, biology on pre-med track. Goal - "(Become) an OBGYN. I am passionate about science and helping, it has always been my dream to become a doctor some day." Favorite subject - Anatomy. "I am a natural savvy for science and I absolutely love the hands-on experience." Favorite book - "Wonder" by R.J. Palaci. Favorite musicians - Ariana Grande; Karol G. Role model - "I think I am a great example of ‘anything is possible.' I came to this country and dedicated myself to making my dreams come true. I am closer than I would've ever imagined and hope that this inspires other immigrants and anyone with ambitious goals for themselves."
MCCLUER NORTH: NICOLE DUFOUR Academic rank - 8 of 316. Sports - Soccer; swimming; cross country. Academic bio - National Honor Society; Academic excellence award. Athletic bio - Swimming: team captain. Soccer: District champion team; team captain; first team all-conference (sophomore, junior); second team all-conference (freshman). Activities - French Honor Society; H.Y.P.E (helping younger peers excel program). College, major - A two-year community college with the A+ Program, graphic design and illustration. Goal - "I would like to go into graphic design and illustration and work in product design." Favorite subject - Fine arts. "I can express my creative choices and thoughts with problem-solving and creating, which I love to do." Favorite book - "Losers Take All," by David Klass. Favorite musician - Wallows. Role model - "One of my biggest role models is my graphic design teacher Jonathan Brunts. Mr. Brunts is easy to talk to and has been an amazing friend for the past four years of my high school career. I see a lot of myself in him and I hope to be as cool and understanding of a person as he is when I grow up."
MCCLUER SOUTH-BERKELEY: ADRIEON KEYS Academic rank - 22 of 193. Sports - Track and field, cross country, basketball, football. Academic bio - Honor Roll;better than 3.0 GPA Athletic bio - Track and field: three-time all-conference; two-time all-state; one-time All-American. Activities - McCluer South-Berkeley Men of Honor. "We go around the St. Louis area helping the less fortunate and showing young boys how men are supposed to behave and carry themselves." College, major - Maryville University, physical therapy. Goal - "I hope that as an adult I make my family proud and show the world who I am and make a name for myself." Favorite subject - Literature. "My teachers do more than just enhance my speaking ability, they show me what's really out there in the world and that no matter where you're from you can make something of your life." Favorite book - "I am Number Four." Favorite musicians - Polo G; AMR Dee Huncho Role model - "My role model is a fictional character named Aomine. He is my role model because of one quote, ‘The only person who can beat me is me.' "
MCKINLEY: TONY TONTHAT Academic rank - 1 of 39. Sports - Soccer, basketball. Academic bio - Honor Roll; Valedictorian; Citizen of the Year. Athletic bio - Soccer: all-district; SLPS Scholar Athlete. Activities - National Honor Society; National Art Honor Society; Transform Ur Future; girls soccer team manager. College, major - Webster University is where I plan to attend this fall. I want to major in Exercise Science because I want to help and train others. I also want to help people recover from injuries. Goal - "I hope to become a good coach and person to others and be a positive influence to people around me. I want to be able to coach a team, be an athletic trainer, and to help those in need. If I can I would also like to be a standup comedian." Favorite subject - Biology. "I have a passion for animals and how the body works the way it does. It is fun and interesting to learn." Favorite book - "My Side of the Mountain." Favorite musician - Trippie Redd. Role model - "Jeremy Lin is my role model because I love that he plays basketball on a professional level and that he has been through so much. I feel like I resemble him in many ways and that he is similar to me. He is a positive influence to others as well."
MEHLVILLE: ALYSON PISKULIC Sports - Tennis. Academic bio - National Honor Society; Senior Executive Board; Post-Dispatch Straight "A" Student Academic Excellence; Sophomore Pilgrimage to the Capitol. Athletic bio - 2018 Post-Dispatch All-Metro girls tennis player of the year; conference player of the year (2017-2018); Class 2 singles runner-up (2017) and third place (2018); sectional singles champion (2016-18); ranked No. 1 in Missouri for class of 2019. Activities - Health Occupation Students of America; French Honors Society; Volunteer for American Diabetes Association; Wire Choir; CTUMC Youth Group. College, major - Missouri State University, biochemistry on a pre-med track. Goal - "I hope to achieve my goal of attending medical school and becoming a physician that treats athletes." Favorite subject - AP chemistry. "I love chemistry because it is not only a tough subject, but I find it really fun!" Favorite book - "City of Glass" by Cassandra Clare. Favorite musician - Dan and Shay. Role model - "I consider my parents to be my role models because they are both hard working, resilient, and dedicated. As a child, my parents are the people who taught me to be strong and give my best effort in everything I do. I aspire to be the type of person that continuously helps others and strives to be the best they can be. Without my parents, I would not be where I am today."
MEDICINE AND BIOSCIENCE: CATHERINE CASSANI Sports - Soccer. Academic bio - AP Scholar; First Honors; Saint Louis Public High League Scholar Athlete Luncheon attendee. Athletic bio - Team captain; first team all-conference. College, major - Creighton University, biology. Goal - "I hope to become a clinical oncologist to help care for and treat patients using both chemotherapy and radiation therapy." Favorite subject - Physics. Favorite book - "Oryx and Crake" by Margaret Atwood. Favorite musician - Dodie. Role model - "I consider Ellen DeGeneres to be my role. She promotes education and is a part of numerous charities to help various groups reach their own goals."
METRO: MICHAEL LAKEY Sports - Baseball, basketball, cross country Academic bio - National Honor Society; Missouri Scholars Academy; SLPS Scholar Athlete. Athletic bio - Baseball: two-time first team all-conference; Coach G Award. Activities - Debate; Concert Band; French Club; Intern 2018 Missouri Democratic Coordinated Campaign; volunteer at St. Vincent de Paul Society of St. Cronan's. College - Truman State. Goal - "I hope to become an urban planner as an adult and work to revitalize the city of St. Louis through more effective and efficient land usage. I recently competed in an urban design challenge and it made me realize how much I love this city and what great infrastructure and potential it has. My dream is to work for the city I love and see it grow and flourish." Favorite subject - History. "I love learning about the past and I think that studying history is imperative to understanding the world." Favorite book - "The Stranger" by Albert Camus. Favorite musician - Kendrick Lamar. Role model - "I consider my father to be my biggest role model. He went through several career changes and multiple college degrees before he figured out what he wanted to do. Along the way, he had a host of incredible life experiences before he settled down and started a family. I hope to one day be the man that my father is today."
METRO-EAST LUTHERAN: SAMANTHA KASTING Sports - Basketball, volleyball, softball. Academic bio - Honor Roll with Distinction; National Honor Society. Athletic bio - Basketball: first team all-Prairie State Conference (2019); all-area third team (2019); honorable mention all-conference (2018). Volleyball: first team all-conference and second team all-area (2018). Softball: honorable mention all-conference. Activities - Gardening Club; Prom Committee; Worldwide Youth in Science and Engineering; Academic Challenge; Fellowship of Christian Athletes. College, major - St. Louis College of Pharmacy, pharmacy. Goal - "I want to fulfill my dream of wanting to be a pharmacist, and I want to leave an impression on others to inspire them to pursue their dreams like I did." Favorite subject - Science. "I really enjoy learning about how the world works. I also like to do research and experiments to find out more about the natural and physical functions of the earth." Favorite book - "The Great Gatsby" by F. Scott Fitzgerald. Favorite musician - Zac Brown Band. Role model - "I would consider Steph Curry as one of my main role models. I say this because Curry carries himself very well as a professional, and the unconventional and hard path he took to get to where he is today in the NBA is truly inspiring. He overcame a lot of adversity to become one of the most successful players in the world. I think that his hard work and determination is something that I can do and use to become successful."
MICDS: JULIA AMATO Sports - Tennis, squash, track and field. Academic bio - National Merit Scholar Finalist; Cum Laude Society; First Honors; Bausch and Lomb Science Award. Athletic bio - Tennis: third place Class 1 state team in 2017. Squash: national qualifier; coaches' award and sportsmanship award. Activities - MICDS Activities Committee (co-head); MICDS chapter of Children's Miracle Network Dance Marathon (co-founder and co-president); peer tutor. Volunteer: in Peru last summer at medical clinic and orphanage. College - Vanderbilt University. Goal - "I do not know exactly what I want to do, but I would like to use math and science in my career. I want to work in medicine or business." Favorite subject - BC Calculus. "I have always loved math because I find it challenging and interesting. Favorite book - "The Great Gatsby." Favorite musician - Luke Bryan. Role model - "My parents are my role models because they push me every day to do my best and teach me to be kind and hard-working."
MILLER CAREER: DAISHA SELTZER Academic rank - 24. Sports - Basketball, cross country. Academic bio - Honor Roll. Athletic bio - Post-Dispatch All-Metro third team; first team all-state; conference player of the year. College - Southwest Tennessee Community College. Goal - "I hope to become a physical therapist." Favorite subject - English. "It challenges me to think outside the box every day." Favorite book - "The Skin I'm In." Favorite musician - Nba Youngboy. Role model - "My mom and father because they are hardworking and independent."
MISSOURI SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND: HUNTER HALL Academic rank - 3. Sports - Track and field, swimming. Academic bio - Honor Roll, Scholar Athlete. Athletic bio - Several top-3 finishes in track and swimming. Activities - Running; boating; gardening; volunteer at local firehouse. College - Missouri State. Goal - "Communications, and public relations." Favorite subject - History. Favorite book - "The Outsiders." Favorite musician - George Jones. Role model - "Teachers, because they set a strong base for me to follow."
MOUNT OLIVE: SAVANNAH BRUHN Academic rank - 8 of 33. Sports - Basketball, volleyball. Academic bio - High Honors; Gold Cat; Purple Cat. Athletic bio - Basketball: leading scorer and most steals (senior); most steals (junior). Activities - Pep Club; NHS president; yearbook; Student Council president (two years); handbook committee; school newspaper editor; prom committee; prom court; homecoming court. College, major - Lincoln Land Community College, nursing. Goal - "I hope to accomplish my BSN, a job at a big hospital, a family and to move to Alabama." Favorite subject - Biology. "It was the class that taught me the most about the subject I am pursing my career in." Favorite book - "The Great Gatsby." Favorite musician - Post Malone. Role model - "I consider my cousin, Megan Donaldson, my role model because she is an RN working at Barnes Jewish Hospital in St. Louis, which is one of my goals to be working at a big hospital like her. Her dedication helps me want to work just as hard and become just as successful."
NASHVILLE: EMILY STERN Academic rank - 19 of 94. Sports - Basketball. Academic bio - Honor Roll (four years), National Honor Society, Ag Science Scholastic Award and the Horticulture Scholastic Award. Athletic bio - Basketball: field goal percentage award (2018-2019). Activities - School Activities: class of 2019 vice president, FFA vice president, Student Council, yearbook, Peer Mentor, National Honor Society. Volunteer: More than 150 hours of community service. College, major - Kaskaskia College, dental hygiene. Goal - "As an adult, I hope to continue serving my community and be a good role model to those around me." Favorite subject - Chemistry. Favorite book - "The Lovely Bones" Favorite musician - Florida Georgia Line Role model - "I consider my dad as my role model. He always puts others before himself and will go out of his way to help anyone who needs it no matter what time of day it is."
NERINX HALL: CLAIRE NICHOLS Academic rank - 18 of 155. Sports - Field hockey, cheerleading, lacrosse. Academic bio - Honor Roll (2015-present), Bronze Medal of Honor National Spanish Exam (2018), Silver Medal of Honor National Spanish Exam (2016-2017), NFHCA National Academic Squad at Nerinx, member of fifth-place team in Forest Park Excellence in Math contest (2018). Athletic bio - Field hockey: team MVP (2018), all-conference honorable mention (2016-2018), state semifinal team (2017). Activities - Gateway Field Hockey Club, lifeguard, Mid-States Hockey SLUH cheerleading. College, major - Babson College, business administration with a concentration in entrepreneurship. Goal - "I hope to work with tech start-ups and ultimately head one myself." Favorite subject - Computer science. Favorite book - "The Outsiders" by S. E. Hinton. Favorite musician - Lil Barnacle. Role model - "I consider my mother my biggest role model. I've never seen someone work so hard for the good of other people, sacrificing everything for her family. She gives herself fully and completely to the people in her life - something I admire and will always try to emulate myself."
NEW ATHENS: LEVI DAAB Academic rank - 1 Sports - Baseball, golf, cross country. Academic bio - Honor roll, Illinois State Scholar. Activities - National Honor Society, Student Council, Math team, Fellowship of Christian Athletes. College, major - Missouri S&T, engineering. Goal - "I hope to be a successful engineer and have a loving family." Favorite subject - Physics. Favorite book - "I Am Number Four" Favorite musician - Garth Brooks. Role model - "My older sister because I can always look up to her and I try to be like her in many ways."
NEW HAVEN: JOSEPH RETHEMEYER Academic rank - 2 of 48. Sports - Cross country, track and field, basketball. Academic bio - Academic all-conference in cross country, track and basketball all four years; Hugh O'Brian Youth Leadership Award; Daughters of the American Revolution Good Citizenship award; Elks Most Valuable Student Scholarship; New Haven Area Chamber of Commerce Youth Citizen of the Year; New Haven High School Academic Activity Award. Athletic bio - Cross country: all-conference, Four Rivers Conference individual champion (2018), all-State honors (2016-2019). Activities - National Honor Society president; Student Council president; Future Business Leaders of America' Shamrock Conservation Association; community leaf raking; park clean-ups; Missouri Clean Stream with the Department of Conservation; volunteered at a local non- profit camp in New Haven, Camp Trinity. College, major - Missouri S&T, civil engineering. Goal - "After graduating from college, I hope to get a job from a contracting or construction company in the St. Louis area. Once I have a steady income, I plan to marry my high school sweetheart and start a family." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "Unbroken" by Laura Hillenbrand. Favorite musician - Old Dominion. Role model - "My greatest role model has been my grandfather, Herman Otten. His dedication to his family and his calling as a pastor has not only showed me but guided me to who I am today. As a young child, he always encouraged us to practice to be our very best in athletics no matter our ability. He showed me what it means to be humble, multiple times, when we asked him to write an autobiography but always turned it down to instead talk about the importance of staying close to our Lord and Savior. Finally, he has taught me the importance of my faith and how to live it out in my everyday life with hard work, respect, and kindness."
NORTH TECH: GEINIA WYNN Academic rank - 8 of 130. Sports - Volleyball, track and field, cheerleading. Academic bio - Outstanding Student Leadership Award, Honor Roll, Renaissance Gold Card Member. Athletic bio - Team MVP. Activities - Member of TREND, Diversity Awareness Partnership, Renaissance. College, major - Southeast Missouri State University, pre-medicine. Goal - "After college, I hope to be accepted into a medical institution where I can specialize in becoming either a pediatrician or an obstetrician gynecologist. I then hope to obtain a residency and get the opportunity to practice in a hospital setting." Favorite subject - English. Favorite book - "When I Was The Greatest" by Jason Reynolds. Favorite musician - Sia, Demi Lovato and Jason Reynolds. Role model - "I consider my grandmother, Jewel, as my role model because she has lived a long life, which has given her a lot of wisdom and the ability to overcome any situation. I hope to be blessed with those same qualities when I become her age."
NORTHWEST ACADEMY: TAYLOR CAIN Academic rank - 1 of 52. Sports - Volleyball, soccer, basketball. Academic bio - Honor Roll. Athletic bio - PHL Scholar Athlete all four years. Activities - Senior class president, peer mediator, student ambassador, Harris Stowe dual enrollment student, work at BJC College, major - Fontbonne University, social work. Goal - "I just want to live without having to struggle. I want to have a career and not just a job. Also, I want to change people's lives for the better. I feel like I have a purpose and in the future I hope to fulfill that purpose." Favorite subject - English. Favorite book - "If You Give A Mouse A Cookie" Favorite music genre - R&B. Role model - "I consider all my past teachers and my current school counselors to be role models because what they do is hard. They are essentially raising a bunch of kids that they did not give birth to. They are patient with us, and even with a class full of kids, they all found individual time to help me out when I needed it. All of my previous teachers/coaches have believed in me when I didn't believe in myself. They saw potential in me that I never knew was there. My current counselors, and of course my mother who raised me, is the reason I go so hard. I can't let them or myself down."
NORTHWEST CEDAR HILL: MEGAN FORTNER Academic rank - 42 of 438. Sports - Basketball, volleyball, soccer, track and field. Academic bio - Academic all-state, Cum Laude, Important Person Award. Athletic bio - Basketball: First team all-conference, all-district, all-state, player of the year. Volleyball: first team all-conference, all-district, all -state, player of the year; STLhighschoolsports.com Player of the Week. Activities - Honor Society, Mu Alpha Theta, volunteering at church: serving Thanksgiving dinner, packing shoe boxes for Christmas. College, major - Jacksonville State University, education. Goal - "I want to become a teacher and a coach when I get older. I had many teachers/coaches who made a big difference throughout my life and I want to do the same." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "To Kill A Mockingbird" Favorite musician - Luke Combs. Role model - "My parents. They have showed me what it means to work hard for something and nothing in life is handed to you. They have also supported me since the day I started and never gave up on me."
NOTRE DAME: FAITHLYN FRITSCHLE Academic rank - Top 5 percent. Sports - Basketball, track and field, cross country. Academic bio - Summa Cum Laude, National Honor Society, Spanish Honor Society, Straight A Tickets, Rockhurst Trustees' Scholarship. Athletic bio - Basketball: captain (2018-2019); all-conference honorable mention (2018-2019); academic all-state team (2018-2019); all-tournament team at Lutheran St. Charles and Duchesne (2018-2019). Track: part of sectional qualifying 400-, 800- and 1600-meter relay teams (2018). Cross country: part of first-place team in Northside Invitational (2017); top 15 individual in Affton meet (2018). Activities - National Honor Society, Spanish Honor Society (co-president), Worldwide Youth in Science and Engineering, Campus Ministry, Student Ambassadors, Academic Coach, Art Club (secretary), Girl Scouts Silver Award, Rebels Elite Basketball Program volunteer. College, major - Rockhurst University, biology. Goal - "I hope to achieve a prominent role in the medical field after succeeding in college. I also desire to be happy and excited with the life I have, sharing that light with my family, friends, workplace and the world overall." Favorite subject - Science. Favorite book - "The Great Gatsby" by F. Scott Fitzgerald. Favorite musician - Luke Combs. Role model - "My mother and father are my greatest role models. Just by being who they are, together they have taught me hard work, perseverance, kindheartedness, selflessness, how to truly love others and much more. I would not be who I am today without their positive influences on my choices and life overall. They are two of my greatest blessings."
O'FALLON: NOLAN BRADLEY Academic rank - 43 of 544. Sports - Lacrosse. Academic bio - National Honor Society; Spanish Honor Society; Rho Kappa Honors Society; Scholar Athlete; Honor Roll; Illinois State Scholar. Athletic bio - Second team all-conference (2017), first-team all-conference (2018). Activities - National Honor Society president; FOR Club; Spanish Club; February Frolics emcee (O'Fallon Talent Show host); Gold Rush (leaders of student section at O'Fallon); volunteer at Spencer Pet Rescue. College, major - Penn State, civil engineering. Goal - "I hope to travel and help the world as an engineer. Also, I want to continue to make videos and be a photographer, on the side." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "Harry Potter." Favorite musician - J. Cole. Role model - "My dad is a role model to me because he has always shown me the best way to do things through his words and his actions. He has taught me important lessons and continues to teach me new ones every day. Additionally, he is extremely successful and works very hard at everything he does. I hope to be able to model my life after his."
O'FALLON CHRISTIAN: MAGDALENE DOOLEY Sports - Softball, basketball, track and field. Academic bio - National Honor Society; A/B Honor Roll; A+ Program. Athletic bio - Softball: all-conference, all-district, all-region. Track: all-conference, all-district, all-sectional, state qualifier, captain. Activities - Pep Club, Fellowship of Christian Athletes, NHS, tutor. College, major - St. Charles Community College, computer-aided drafting. Goal - "I desire to fulfill God's plan for my life and use the gifts he has given to me." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "The Bible." Favorite music - Joy FM radio. Role model - "My role model is my brother, Jacob. He has taught me a lot and challenged me to set higher goals. He has many character traits I admire and want to further develop, like being humble, kind, honest, compassionate and friendly."
(Page C8)
OAKVILLE: EMMA MUELLER Academic rank - 6 of 385. Sports - Cross country, track and field. Academic bio - Summa Cum Laude; Missouri Bright Flight; AP Scholar with Honor; Glory of Missouri Award for Charity; National Spanish Exam honorable mention; FBLA Economics state champion. Athletic bio - Cross country: Academic all-state; sectional qualifier (2015 and 2017) ; age group winner in 2019 Go! St. Louis half-marathon. Activities - Federal Reserve Student Board of Directors; FBLA; DECA; Students on the Go! ; National Honor Society; National Spanish Honor Society; Student Council; Concord Trinity UMC Youth Group; Gibby's Dance Productions. College, major - Missouri S&T, applied mathematics with an emphasis on actuarial science. Goal - "I would like to become a successful actuary with a nice home and happy family. I also want to continue volunteering in my community and compete in half and full marathons." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "Harry Potter." Favorite musician - Phillip Phillips. Role model - "My parents because they taught me how to be kind and accepting towards others. They are hardworking and have given up a lot to care for my sisters and me."
OKAWVILLE: KATHRYN LOHMAN Academic rank - 1 of 47. Sports - Basketball, volleyball, softball. Academic bio - 2018-2019 Illinois State Scholar; 2018-2019 IHSA All-State Academic Team honorable mention; National Honor Society (2018-2019 vice president); Highest Honor Roll; Academic Challenge in Engineering and Science: sectional runner-up in biology and third place in chemistry; regional winner in biology and runner-up in chemistry. Athletic bio - Basketball:All-conference (2018-2019); Class 1A second-team all-area (2018-2019) ; 41st Annual Lions Club Classic All-Star (2018-2019) ; Memorial Foundation Female Scholar-Athlete of the month (Sept. 2018) ; Nashville Thanksgiving Tournament second team (2018) ; Mascoutah Holiday Basketball Tournament first team (2017); highest free-throw percentage (three times) ; most rebounds (once). Activities - National Honor Society (2018-2019) vice president (tutor to Spanish I students); Student Leadership Team four years (mentor to sixth grade students); Student Council four years 2018-2019 president; 2017-2018 vice president; class president; WYSE/Academic Challenge Team; Mu Alpha Theta Math Honor Society; Quill and Scroll English Honor Society; Tri-M Music Honor Society; Spanish Club; Science Club; Fellowship of Christian Athletes; Drama Club vice president; 2019 production of "Murder Can be Habit-Forming"; Timepiece staff for four years; Concert Band for four years. College, major - Missouri, chemistry/pre-med. Goal - "I want to be an active member in the community I live in as well as make a big impact on the lives of others through my work as a doctor. I would also like to make a big difference in the improvement of health care in developing countries." Favorite subject - Science. Favorite book - "The Help" by Kathryn Stockett. Favorite musician - Ed Sheeran. Role model - "My grandpa, Hugo, is my biggest role model because he has taught me that no matter the situation or challenges you may face, it is always possible to still achieve your dreams through hard work, focus, and dedication."
ORCHARD FARM: MATTHEW BAUER Academic rank - 3 of 155. Sports - Cross country, basketball, track and field. Academic bio - Maintained A-Honor Roll all four years; 4.0 unweighted GPA, with a weighted GPA of 4.18; 34 on ACT; enrolled in three AP courses and two dual-credit courses; on track to receive the Summa Cum Laude award at graduation. Athletic bio - Cross country: all-conference (2017-2019), GAC North conference champion (2017). Track: sectional qualifier, all-state in 3200 run (2017). Activities - FFA; 4-H; National Honor Society; Fellowship of Christian Athletes; vice president of FFA Chapter; vice president of Fellowship of Christian Athletes. College, major - Northwest Missouri State University, plant science. Goal - "I hope to make a difference in the field of agriculture by making new advancements in plant genetics to help better feed the growing population of our world." Favorite subject - Science. Favorite book - "The Shack" by William P. Young Favorite musician - Garth Brooks. Role model - "I consider my dad to be my biggest role model, because he has taught me the importance of hard work and striving to reach my goals. Without him, I would not have the determination and drive that I have today."
PACIFIC: CASIE CULLINANE Academic rank - 19 of 178. Sports - Track and field, cross country. Academic bio - Academic all-conference/state awards; chosen to attend Girls State and the Sophomore Pilgrimage; chosen as MVP for two years by history teacher and athletic director/principal; Gold Card recipient all four years (3.5+ GPA, no more than 2 days missed). Athletic bio - Track and Field: pole vault state qualifier; first team all-conference; all-district team MVP (two seasons); school record holder; athlete of the week. Cross country: State qualifier, rookie of the year 2015, athlete of the week. Activities - Red Bud FBLA and District 9 President; ambassadors member; Student Athlete Leadership Team; Beta Club; 500+ Service hours; FBLA state and nationals qualifier; Club PoleVaultSTL. College, major - Maryville University, secondary education. Goal - "I hope to accomplish what my teachers and coaches have done for me. Being able to teach and coach will allow me to do that. I want to have an impact on our youth, to give back, and to continue coaching the sport I have passion for that has so much influenced my life." Favorite subject - American history. Favorite book - "Night" by Elie Wiesel. Role model - "My biggest role model in my life is my dad. Ever since I was little he has pushed me to be the best I can be. He always encouraged me to try even harder, and to give my all and then some at everything I do and to always jump at an opportunity to try something new. That my limits are endless, and if I set my mind to something, nothing can stop me from accomplishing it. He's always taught me that nothing beats hard work, dedication and passion. I cannot thank my dad enough for everything he has done for me."
PARKWAY CENTRAL: CHARLES MEIER Sports - Soccer, basketball, volleyball. Academic bio - National Honor Society; National Business Honor Society; Honor roll; Scholar athlete in three sports for four years. Athletic bio - Soccer: All-state (2018), state champion (2017). Basketball: Final four (2017-18), conference sportsmanship award (2019). Volleyball: state champion (2017, 2018). Activities - Student Council; co-president of DECA; Senior Men; volunteer for Special Olympics (four years). College - Missouri. Goal - "Ultimately I hope to own my own business and help coach youth sports." Favorite subject - Business. Favorite book - "The Giver" by Lois Lowry. Favorite musician - Chance the Rapper. Role model - "My Pawpa because through hard work he created a very successful business of his own and raised seven children who are all college graduates. My Pawpa is also very generous with his friends and family and enjoys life thoroughly."
PARKWAY NORTH: TORIN HYLAN Sports - Soccer, track and field, golf. Academic bio - Principal's List for 4.0 GPA and above (four years); AP Scholar with distinction; Maryland Heights Chamber of Commerce Student of the Month; Certificate of Honor as a recipient of the Boys State Program;Certificate of Honor for Outstanding Achievement in Mathematics (twice); Certificate of Honor for Outstanding Achievement in Science. Athletic bio - Soccer: All-conference, newcomer of the year (2016), all-academic team (2016, 2017), Exemplary Sportsmanship (2017), first team all-conference (2019). Activities - Mock Trial; Mu Alpha Theta; Student Council senior class vice president; A+; Key Club; Volunteered at SPENSA. College, major - Purdue University, computer science. Goal - "I hope to establish a good career doing something I enjoy and be a good parent for my kids one day." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "Catcher in the Rye." Favorite musician - Juice WRLD. Role model - "My mom because she worked really hard in school and in life to get to where she is today."
PARKWAY SOUTH: LAINE RITTER Academic rank - 2 of 420 Sports - Soccer, basketball. Academic bio - Summa Cum Laude; Missouri Scholars Academy finalist; Missouri Girls State nominee; South Star Award; National Honor Society; Mu Alpha Theta; Beta Chi Pi; Student of the Month Award in algebra, calculus, honors English. Athletic bio - Soccer: team MVP and defensive MVP; second team all-conference. Basketball: all-academic, conference record for most charges taken. Activities - Link Crew; Connect South; Spanish Club; FBLA; sixth-grade camp counselor; Young Life; Vacation Bible School counselor; boys soccer team manager; Special Olympics volunteer; lifeguard/coach of summer swim team, tutor. College - Missouri. Goal - "My dream is to become a doctor. I also want to join Doctors Without Borders and complete missions with that organization as frequently as possible. It is extremely important to me that lesser developed countries have access to sufficient medical care. I want to be one of the people who help actively bring about that change. I want to travel the world and eventually start a family. I would also like to be a Young Life leader and continue volunteering so that I can give back to my community." Favorite subject - Biology and chemistry. Favorite book - "The Glass Castle" by Jeannette Walls. Favorite musicians - Post Malone; Kalil. Role model - "I consider my mom to be my role model. She is stronger than anyone I have ever met. Whenever I need her, she is my greatest supporter. She is incredibly kind and selfless. Those are qualities that I work very hard to imitate and bring into my own life. She appreciates people for their best qualities and accepts them despite their worst qualities. She is very funny and lives a reserved yet spontaneous lifestyle. She is wise beyond her years and is willing to share her knowledge. She also knows, however, that sometimes people have to go through things on their own to be fully affected. She has been a great mother and friend, and I definitely would not have grown into the person I am without her love, support, wisdom and forgiveness."
PARKWAY WEST: TESS ALLGEYER Sports - Volleyball, basketball, track and field. Academic bio - Blue Honor Roll (4.0 GPA or higher); academic all-state in volleyball, basketball and track; "Glory of Missouri" Award recipient for the virtue of temperance; "Rookie of the Year" award (2016); Longhorn Pride award (2016). Athletic bio - Volleyball: second team all-conference, second team all-district. Basketball: first team all-conference and all-district; all-tournament team selections; 2017 All-Suburban Sportsmanship Award. Track: state champion in 800-meter relay (2017), fifth-place finish in 800-meter relay (2018). Activities - Captains Council; Blue Crew; National Honor Society; Mu Alpha Theta; Life Teen Youth Group. College, major - Lindenwood University-Belleville, sports management. Goal - "I hope to become someone who loves what they do and I hope to be happy with whatever blessings I have in my life. I would love to have a job that I am passionate about and be able to enjoy life to the fullest in everything I do. My dream job as an adult would probably be working for a sports team or company and helping organize big events." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "The Great Gatsby" by F. Scott Fitzgerald. Favorite musician - Dan and Shay. Role model - "I consider my mom to be my role model because of her constant pursuit of strength in everything she does. She not only gives selflessly, but also presents the example of excellence that I hope to become one day. She knows how to love and how to fight. She grounds herself in faith and virtue and is a perfect representation of an incredible individual. Plus, she had seven kids and is still a boss in everything she does."
PATTONVILLE: KENDALL BATTLE Academic rank - 24 of 341. Sports - Field hockey, basketball, soccer, track and field. Academic bio - First team all-academic in soccer, field hockey, basketball and track (four years); DECA district champion in sports and entertainment marketing; DECA state finalist (second place) in sports and entertainment Marketing. Athletic bio - Soccer: Led team in goals scored (2016), offensive player of the year (2016), first team all-region, second team all-conference (2016); team MVP (2017, 2018); first team all-conference (2017), second team all-state (2017), conference player of the year (2018), third team All-Metro (2018). Field hockey: first team all-conference (2016-2017). Basketball: all-conference honorable mention. Track: first team all-conference (2017), all-state in 400-meter relay (2018). Activities - National Honor Society; National English Honor Society; class treasurer (freshman, junior and senior years); Fellowship of Christian Athletes; DECA; Pattonville United (school improvement committee); Ariya Rites of Passage Program. College, major - University of Cincinnati, business. Goal - "Of course I desire to be successful. But I also want my success to impact others. I hope to start a boys and girls club to help the underprivileged youth participate in extracurricular activities." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "Mara Dyler" trilogy by Michelle Hodkin. Favorite musician - Daniel Caesar. Role model - "When thinking of a role model, Michelle Obama is the only woman that stands out. She simply embodies everything I believe a successful person is, and she continues to be successful even through adversity."
PRINCIPIA: ALEXANDER REYES Academic rank - 2 of 63. Sports - Wrestling, football. Academic bio - Helen Childs Spiritual Progress (2017); National Spanish Honor Society (2017); Year Transcript (2017); Principia Scholar Athlete; Nezzell Christie Dennis Scholarship (2018); KMOX Student of Achievement (2018). Athletic bio - Wrestling: three-time state qualifier; fourth-place state finish (2019); Iron Man Award (2017-2018); SLWOA Most Improved Wrestler (2019); SLWOA Superior Achievement (2019); Metro League All-Star Wrestling (2018, 2019). Activities - Simunye Service Trip (2018); Canfield House Hall Chief (2016-17); Canfield House Boys Core (2017-18); Dominican Republic Service Trip (2017); Religious Committee Head (2016-18); Spirit Committee Head (2018-19); Christian Science Committee Head (2016-2017); Hubbell House captain (2018-19); Reconciliation Advisory Board member (2017-18). College, major - Principia College, mechanical engineering. Goal - "I hope to join the Marine Corps and earn the title of Marine Raider." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "Can't Hurt Me" by David Goggins. Favorite musician - Johnny Cash. Role model - "I consider my parents role models because they've taught me to overcome challenges."
PRIORY: LOUIS ROLWES Sports - Wrestling, football, track and field. Academic bio - Form Prize, recognizing the highest cumulative GPA in the junior class (2018); Bausch and Lomb Honorary Science Medal (2018); Dartmouth College book award (2018); Gold medal in the National Latin Exam (2016, 2017); National Merit Commended Scholar (2018), Superior Academic Achievement Award (2018, 2019). Athletic bio - Wrestling:sixth-place finish at state (2019); state qualifier (2018); Priory MVP (2019), Coach's Award (2018). Activities - Student Council vice president (2019); Beekeeping Club: founding president (2018-19); The Sodality of Our Lady of Walsingham: Co-Prefect (vice president) and officer (2016-19); Angelic Warfare Confraternity (2017-19); St. Augustines Soup Kitchen (2017-19); fishing; hunting, reading. College - United State Naval Academy. Goal - "I hope to leave behind the world a better place than it would have been without me." Favorite subject - Physics. Favorite book - "Robinson Crusoe." Favorite musician - The Highwaymen. Role model - "My greatest role model is my father, Christopher Rolwes. He exemplifies the virtues of courage, sacrifice, perseverance and hard work. I have never met anyone else willing to sacrifice so much for his family. I can only hope to be half the man he is one day."
RED BUD: ALYSSA HELLER Academic rank - 1 of 86 Sports - Volleyball, basketball, track and field. Academic bio - Honor roll; National Honor Society president. Athletic bio - Volleyball: Marissa-Coulterville all-tournament team (2018); Red Bud 3Ds Award (2018). Track: Most improved (2017). Activities - Spanish Club; Platinum Chef; Math Team; Student Council (vice president); Class Executive Board; Advisory Council; Fellowship of Christian Athletes; FBLA (treasurer); Senior Youth Group at church (president); and yearbook. College, major - Southeast Missouri State University, nursing. Goal - "I hope to eventually become a flight nurse in or around the St. Louis area." Favorite subject - Anatomy and physiology. Favorite book - "The Cabin" by Natasha Preston. Favorite musician - Luke Combs. Role model - "I consider my father as my role model. He has never double guessed what he has wanted to do in his life. When something goes wrong, he figures out a way to fix it without problems. He has never given up on me and has always been there for me no matter what."
RITENOUR: CORALIS BOBE Academic rank - 13 of 351. Sports - Volleyball, swimming. Academic bio - Academic Letter; 4.0 Honor Roll; Academic Pin; Quill & Scroll International Honors; academic all-state. Athletic bio - Volleyball: Second team all-conference; first team all-district; academic all-state; first team at Brentwood and University City tournaments; second team at Ritenour Invitational; district champion. Activities - Mu Alpha Theta; Feminist Club; newspaper Editor in Chief. College - Lindenwood University-St. Charles. Goal - "Inspire young adults to enjoy the game of volleyball as much as I do and to use sports as motivation to succeed." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "The Outsiders." Favorite musician - Max Schneider. Role model - Ron Steinschiber, Ritenour teacher: "He is a selfless human being that does whatever he can to help others do well in life."
RIVERVIEW GARDENS: CHRISTOPHER ROBINSON Academic rank - 18 of 168. Sports - Basketball, track and field. Academic bio - Semester's Best; Student of the Month. Athletic bio - MVP of team. Activities - NHS; DECA; Link Crew; college ambassador. College, major - Fort Scott Community College, engineering. Goal - "I hope to become a successful engineer who is able to provide for his family and friends." Favorite subject - Sports and entertainment management. Favorite book - "To Kill a Mockingbird." Favorite musician - J Cole. Role model - "My dad. He didn't attend college and was still able to provide for the family and has made me the man I am today."
ROOSEVELT: CHARLES NSHIMIYIMANA Academic rank - 1 of 98. Sports - Soccer, track and field, football. Academic bio - Rotary Club of St. Louis Public Schools young citizen's award class of 2019; Most Outstanding Student in Latin (2018); Most Outstanding Student in Advanced Algebra (2018); National Society of High School Scholar (2019); Citizenship Award (2018); Most outstanding within the English Department (2019); Gold Club for demonstrating academic excellence by earning a 4.0 & above GPA (2019). Athletic bio - Football: Academic all-state kicker, all-conference kicker, Public High League championship (2018). Soccer: district championship. Activities - Upward bound program (2017-2019); Boy and Girls Club (2018-2019); Pre-College Initiative (PCI) Program at Missouri Science & Technology (2019); Peace Center; Friends of Refugees (2017-2019). College - Harris-Stowe or Missouri S&T. Goal - "I want to become an engineer or work in computer science." Favorite subject - Science and math. Favorite book - "Facing the Lion" by Joseph Lemasolai Lekuton. Favorite musician - Meddy. Role model - "My mom because she was always there for me, show me that it is possible when I think that it is impossible."
ROSATI-KAIN: ELLEN THOMPSON Academic rank - 1 of 54. Sports - Field hockey, swimming. Academic bio - 4.0 or above First Honors (2015-19); Valedictorian; Bright Flight Scholar; National Honor Society; Science and Math National Honor Society; St. Louis University Engineering Academy Invitee (2017). Athletic bio - Field Hockey: AAA all-conference defensive player of the year 2018; team defensive MVP (2017); Best Sportsmanship (2018). Swimming: Best Freshman (2016). Activities - Senior Class Vice President; National Honor Society president; Science National Honors Society; Science and Environmental Club; Math National Honors Society (Mu Alpha Theta); Service Club (leader); French Club; Student Ambassador. College, major - Missouri, chemistry. Goal - "I plan to pursue a doctorate in chemistry and be involved in research to make the world a better place. Oh, and NASA if you're reading this, please hire me." Favorite subject - Science. Favorite book - "We Are All Stardust" by Stefan Klein. Favorite musician - Frank Ocean. Role model - "I consider my parents to be my role models because they have always supported me in everything I do (even if that meant driving to morning field hockey practice at 4:30 a.m.) and they always go above and beyond to provide a great home for me and my brothers. They taught me the importance of hard work and perseverance, as well as the importance of having strong morals and character."
(Page C9)
ROXANA: ABIGAIL STAHLHUT Academic rank - 4 of 124. Sports - Softball, volleyball. Academic bio - Silver Medallion recipient; Illinois State Scholar; Urban League Empowered Youth Award recipient; IHSA Scholar Athlete; President's Academic Excellence Award; Junior Rotarian. Athletic bio - Softball: Third team all-state (2017); second team all-state (2018). Activities - Student Council president; National Honor Society vice president; Business Club secretary; Riverbend Growth Association Young Adults Committee; Pep Club vice president; Home Ec. Club; Letterman Club; Saturday Scholars; Extreme Elite softball; weightlifting. Volunteer: Community Kids Christmas Party; Salvation Army bell ringing; Mississippi Valley Blood Drive; Beverly Farms Buzy Bee Bakery; Kreative Kids Obstacle Course; Big Brother/Big Sister Video Project; American Cancer Society; Community Hope Center; Pride; Ronald McDonald House. College, major - Indiana University, exercise science, minor in sports psychology. Goal - "I plan to pursue a career in chiropractic medicine after obtaining a degree in exercise science from Indiana University, and a goal of mine is to focus on the well-being of athletes. While practicing as a chiropractor, my hope is to positively affect the performance of each athlete through physical maintenance and/or the physical rehabilitation process many competitors face post-injury. Athletics are an important aspect of many young adult's lives, and the thought of having a small part in any person's athletic/wellness journey excites me." Favorite subject - History. Favorite book - Any of John Green's work. Favorite musician - Garth Brooks. Role model - "I will always consider my dad, Wade Stahlhut, my biggest role model. He has taught me lessons in patience, accountability, how to be a strong person, and he reminds me to stay humble, no matter what. He continuously puts our family first, and provides opportunities for my sisters and I that have shaped our lives. One of those opportunities, for me, was softball; he has supported my softball career from the very beginning. As both my coach and father, he has been my best friend throughout my entire life, and I couldn't be more thankful for him shaping me into the person I am today. I am so grateful to have his influence in my life. I love you Dad!!"
SECKMAN: SETH LOUNSBURY Academic rank - 188 of 443. Sports - Football, track, volleyball. Athletic bio - Second-team all-district quarterback, second-team all-conference athlete. College - Southeast Missouri State. Goal - "To own my own business." Favorite subject - Science. Favorite book - "The Great Gatsby." Favorite musical group/musician - Lil Uzi Vert. Role model - "My parents because they have showed me from their handwork and dedication that if I give 100% at anything I do, I will be very successful."
ST. LOUIS U. HIGH: JOSEPH FEDER Academic rank - Top 10 percent. Sports - Swimming. Academic bio - AP Scholar with Distinction; First Honors; National Latin Exam gold medalist. Athletic bio - Swimming state champion; All-Metro third team (sophomore year), second team (junior year), first team (senior year); 14-time state finalist, 10-time medal winner; 100 freestyle, 200 freestyle relay, 400 freestyle relay school record holder; 400 freestyle relay Class 2 state gold medalist and record holder. Activities - National Honors Society Secretary; school newspaper (Prep News) core-staff member; Senior Advisor to freshmen; Pastoral Team leader; Parkway Swim Club. College - St. Louis University. Goal - "I plan to double major in chemistry and economics. Whatever I do, I hope to live my life as a man for others." Favorite subject - Calculus Favorite book - "Catch-22" by Joseph Heller. Favorite musical group/musician - Imagine Dragons Role model - "I think that my close friend, Daniel Fink, is one of my role models. Ever since I have known him, he has been an incredible example of how to live with humility, humor and courage. He has always pushed me to be better, both in academics and athletics. I would not be the person I am today without his friendship."
SOLDAN: DASHA TRAVIS Academic rank - 1 of 114. Sports - Volleyball. Academic bio - Honor Roll, Good Attendance, Top Academic Student. Athletic bio - Have participated and been rewarded in the ceremony of the Student's Athlete for four years. Activities - Drama; very active in school activities, such as concerts. College, major - Indiana State University, pre-medicine and biology. Goal - "I plan to become a pediatrician and travel the world to keep children that are in need of serious care." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "The Fault in Our Stars." Favorite musical group/musician - Lauryn Hill. Role model - "I would consider my grandfather a role model because he is very hard-working and determined, a trait I see in myself."
ST. CHARLES: AUTUMN LOONEY Academic rank - 10 of 193. Sports - Swimming. Academic bio - SCHS Student of the Month; Evening with the Stars; The Board of Education of the School District of the City of St Charles Certificate of Appreciation; The Board of Education of the School District of the City of St Charles Outstanding Academic Achievement Award; 4.1 GPA. Athletic bio - USA swimming scholastic all-American; Gateway Athletic Conference all-conference all-American Award four years; all-state award four years; MVP swimmer three years; MISCA Missouri Girls Swimming and Diving Class 1 swimmer of the year, 2018; two-event MSHSAA state champion, 2018, 50 free and 100 fly; two-event MSHSAA state champion, 2019, 50 free and 100 fly; Class 1 MSHSAA record holder, 2018, 100 fly; three-event GAC North Central Division record holder, 50 free, 100 free, 100 fly; GAC Record holder, 100 free , 100 fly; Wendy's Heisman School Winner; Six-event GAC Champion (over high school career (2016-2019); Six-event state finalist. Activities - National Honor Society treasurer; Renaissance Steering Committee; Mu Alpha Theta; Volunteer for the Special Needs Prom; Gateway 2 Change. College, major - University of Kansas, biology. Goal - "I hope to become a role model for young athletes." Favorite subject - Science. Favorite book - "The Divergent" series. Favorite musical group/musician - Imagine Dragons. Role model - "I consider my swim coaches role models because they have had the most impact on my life. They push me to become a better athlete and a better person. They have shown me that being respectful and kind can make an athlete go from good to outstanding. I cannot thank them enough for the time and effort they put into coaching me."
ST. CHARLES WEST: TRENT CHAMPAGNE Sports - Basketball, soccer, track and field, baseball, tennis, cross country. Academic bio - 4.0 GPA, Academic Gold Card, seven-time honor roll, 16-time all-GAC Academic team. Athletic bio - St. Charles County Amateur Sports Hall of Fame (outstanding male athlete, small-school division). Basketball: first-team all-state; three-time first-team all-district; three-time first-team all-conference; player of the year; three-time team captain; conference, district and sectional champion; 1,373 points scored, top 5 all-time at SCW; scholarship to Quincy University for basketball. Soccer: third-team All-Metro; first-team all-state; sectional player of the year; two-time first-team all-conference; state leader in assists this year; second place in state. Track: GAC champion in triple jump, fourth in district, fifth in sectional. Baseball: second-team all-conference. Tennis: third-place finish at GAC Tournament. Cross country: conference champion, district and state qualifier; recognized in STLtoday.com and Post-Dispatch as Athlete of the Week. Activities - National Honor Society; President of the Fellowship of Christian Athletes; Student Council Officer; Key Club; Sophomore Class President; Assembly Coordinator; head coach of the SCW 8th grade feeder basketball team and camp counselor at the SCW and Immanuel Lutheran basketball camps; soccer and basketball referee. College - Quincy University. Goal - "I hope to leverage my degree in sports journalism and business." Favorite subject - Calculus. Favorite books - "Killing England" and historical books. Favorite musical group/musician - Juice WRLD. Role model - "My mom. She was smart, funny, talented, accomplished and taught me so many life lessons, and how to be kind and treat others with respect and to face adversity with dignity and grace."
ST. DOMINIC: JACK NIGGEMEIER Academic rank - 28 of 197. Sports - Football, basketball, baseball. Academic bio - 2017 and 2018 academic all-state football; Club 30 ACT; Honor Roll 2015-2019. Athletic bio - 2018 second-team all-state defensive back; 2018 first-team all-district defensive back; 2018 second-team all-conference defensive back; 2018 second-team all-conference punter; 2017 second-team all-district defensive back. Activities - Alum of the 2017 Missouri Leadership Seminar; Member of St. Dominic Athletic Leadership Team; St. Dominic Senior Advisor. College, major - William Woods University, business administration. Goal - "I hope to finish college and make a good living while raising a family of my own. I want to ultimately be a man others can look up to and raise a great family and great kids." Favorite subject - History. Favorite book - "The Blood of Olympus." Favorite musical group/musician - Alan Jackson. Role model - "My entire family, every one of them is a great role model that I can always look up to for their character or work ethic. They are amazing people who have shaped me to who I am today."
ST. JOSEPH'S: SARA KIRSCH Sports - Cross country, track and field, racquetball. Academic bio - "I have been given the honor of STEM scholar both my junior and senior years at St Joe's. I have consistently been ranked at the top of my class. I am a member of National Honors Society, French Honors Society, Mu Alpha Theta (Math Honors Society), Beta Chi Pi (Science Honor Society), Literati (English Honors Society), and Rho Kappa (History Honors Society). I received the St. Anselm College book award for leadership and academic success." Athletic bio - "I have medaled in many different races for both cross country and track. I was runner-up in my division for racquetball this year." Activities - "I am the chief sports editor of the yearbook at St. Joe. I am a student ambassador and was a Kairos retreat leader. I am a member of the St. Joe scholar bowl varsity team. I also participated in youth and government each year, where I served in the leadership position of judge the last two years." College, major - University of Notre Dame, applied computational mathematics and statistics. Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "The Great Gatsby." Role model - "I consider both of my parents to be role models because they have both worked so hard to make a great life for me and my siblings. They always maintain positive attitudes and set an example of hard work and dedication. My mom went back to nursing school later in life to pursue her true passion, which sets an example for me to always go after what I want. I also consider my cross country and track coach, Keelin Baine Russell, to be a role model. She shows me what hard work looks like every single day at practice. Her dedication to making all of us better athletes and better people, in general, inspires me to be a better person. She works so diligently to make sure everyone is happy and working hard all the time. I can always look to her for encouragement. She has always believed in me, and I am so thankful for her role in my life."
ST. MARY'S: ADAM WILLETT Academic rank - 1 of 96. Sports - Wrestling, cross country. Academic bio - Gold Renaissance Award, eight times; Senior Marianist Dragon of the Month for Quality Education. Athletic bio - St. Mary's cross country award for team leadership; St. Mary's Wrestling Dragon Spirit Award; St. Mary's wrestling award for Most Improved Wrestler. Activities - President of the National Honors Society; A+ Program; Scholar Bowl. College, major - Missouri University of Science & Technology, chemistry. Goal - "I hope to do scientific research for a university." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "The Elegant Universe" by Brian Greene. Favorite musical group/musician - The Eagles. Role model - "My dad because he has taught me many life lessons that I will use throughout my life."
ST. PIUS X: JEREMY ISENMAN Academic rank - 2 of 73. Sports - Baseball, basketball, soccer. Academic bio - Academic all-state baseball; National Honor Society. Athletic bio - Baseball: all-state, all-district, all-conference; Jefferson County Leader player of the week; All-Metro team; Regional Radio Dream team. Activities - Jefferson College math competition; math tutoring; Red Cross blood drive; school gala; parish auction; National Honor Society; Ambassadors; FBLA; high school softball manager; executive officer; class vice president. College, major - Maryville University, engineering and data science. Goal - "As an adult, I hope to have a big loving family that are well supported by my wife and I. I hope to give my children everything my parents have been able to give me, and a great fun filled life like I have now. I hope to continue to have a happy and fun attitude toward life, even when I am old. I want to become successful in the data science world and if that does not work out, I could resort to engineering. In my life, I do a lot of basketball refereeing,. Next year I will be starting high school basketball officiating. I hope when I grow older that I continue to referee and get some college games in there because I enjoy the sport and the extra money will be nice." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "The Glass Castle." Favorite musical group/musician - "This depends. On warm summer days filled with baseball, I listen to country and put on Florida Georgia Line or Luke Combs. Other than that, I am a huge J. Cole fan." Role model - "One person I consider to be a role model in my life is my father. My father came from a very poor family, so his life was never full of luxuries. He put himself through college and landed a job with AT&T. Since then he has always moved up in the company and he works very hard day in and day out to keep trying to receive a higher job rank. He puts others needs before his own and loves his family. He has always wanted to help his dad out, helping him with his bills, visiting him in the hospital and giving him two-hour rides home. My dad has always been there and given me rides to all my different sporting events, especially baseball, and always makes sure I am putting out as much effort as I can with school. My dad volunteers everywhere, especially with in our parish for CYC sports, and he even just received an award for his work. I have kind of shadowed him his whole life, and I hope I become the man he is some day."
STAUNTON: GRIFFIN BIANCO Academic rank - 1 of 99. Sports - Football, baseball, basketball. Academic bio - Illinois State Scholar; 2019 Silver Medallion Award; Honor Roll, four years; Frederick Douglas and Susan B. Anthony Award. Athletic bio - First-team all-conference, baseball; second-team all-conference, baseball. Activities - National Honor Society treasurer; SHS Student Council; Salvation Army bell ringer, nine years. College, major - Maryville University, actuarial science. Goal - "I hope to become an actuary after college." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "The Giver." Favorite musical group/musician - Luke Combs. Role model - "Peyton Manning because he is a leader and role model on and off of the field."
SULLIVAN: KATIE CREEK Academic rank: 1 of 150. Sports - Volleyball, basketball, soccer. Academic bio - Principal's Honor Roll (3.5 GPA and above); Renaissance Award; Academic All-Conference/All-State; Academic Excellence (4.0 GPA); Rotary Top Ten Award. Athletic bio - Volleyball first-team all-conference and all-district, 2018. Activities - National Honor Society; Pep Club. Volunteer: Special Olympics; Salvation Army bell ringing; Link Crew Tutor. College, major - University of Missouri, biology. Goal - "I hope to become a successful doctor that helps patients when they are in need." Favorite subject - Anatomy and Physiology. Favorite book - "The Help" by Katheryn Stockett. Favorite musical group/musician - Thomas Rhett and Luke Combs. Role model - "I consider my mom my role model. She always strives to make others happy and has a positive attitude no matter the circumstance."
SUMMIT: NATHAN HUMPHREY Sports - Basketball, baseball. Academic bio - Rockwood Summit Student of the Year, National Merit Finalist, St. Louis County Outstanding Student Leader. Athletic bio - Basketball: academic all-state; Suburban Conference Sportsmanship Award. Activities - National Honor Society officer; Rockwood Summit LINK Crew; youth basketball coach; Boy Scouts. College, major - University of Alabama, engineering. Goal - "I plan to become an engineer and hope to solve meaningful problems in the world around me while being a role model to others." Favorite subject - Math. "I enjoy the logic involved and the use of problem solving." Favorite book: "The Closer: My Story," by Mariano Rivera with Wayne R. Coffey. Favorite musical group/musician - Montgomery Gentry. Role model - "My dad has always been a role model to me. He not only earns his own successes in life and is willing to step up when work needs to be done but also is always humble and does the little things to help the people around him."
SUMNER: ERICA WALKER Academic rank - 2 of 55. Sports - Soccer, basketball, tennis, volleyball, dance, cheerleading. Academic bio - Salutatorian. Athletic bio - Most Improved Athlete Award. Activities - Volunteer work; executive officer in JROTC. College, major - SIU Carbondale, social work. Goal - "I hope to accomplish all my goals, such as being a social worker, a writer, having my own hair salon and traveling the world." Favorite subject - English. Favorite book: "Doing My Own Thing" by Nikki Carter. Favorite musical group/musician - Nicki Minaj. Role model - "I consider my older cousin my role model because she is someone I look up to and hope to be like one day. She has attended college, earned her degree and she has found a job in her major and started a family of her own."
TIMBERLAND: EMILY REHAGEN Academic rank - 21 of 406. Sports - Volleyball. Academic bio - All-State academic (2017-2019) GAC All-Academic (2016-2019). Athletic bio - Second-team all-conference (2016), first-team all-district (2016-2019), first-team all-conference (2017-2019), All-State Honorable Mention (2017), first-team all-state (2018-2019), first-team all-regional (2018). Activities - President of National Honor Society, Link Crew, HOSA, Crochet Club, play piano. College, major - Quincy University, nursing. Goal - "Eventually I want to go back to school to become a Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist. I want to be able to start a family of my own while making time for my adventurous future." Favorite subject - Science. Favorite book - "The Last Song" by Nicholas Sparks. Favorite musician - Ariana Grande. Role model - "My sister, Ashley Rehagen, is an excellent role model. She reminds me to continue to be positive and look on the bright side of every situation. She has taught me to put myself in other peoples shoes and to be selfless. Ashley managed to graduate college and work a full time job while being a single mother of my niece, Charlie. She is truly a warrior and is not given enough credit for all the hard work she does."
(Page C10)
THOMAS JEFFERSON: LICHENG MA Academic rank - 2 of 10. Sports - Soccer, volleyball. Academic bio - Achievement in national Greek exam, bronze medal in national Italian exam, first place team (small school devision) in Washington University physics contest, the Osborn award for STEM (school award). Activities - Member of FTC robotics team, President of the school troupe for International Thespian Society. College, major - Boston College Carroll School of Management. Goal - "I wish to become someone who works not just for success but also for enjoyment. I want to remain kind and sincere to other people at all times." Favorite subject - AP Calculus. Favorite book - "All the King's Men." Role model - "My role models are all the teachers who have taught me in high school. They are all talented in their own ways. They are not only knowledgeable but have many hobbies. Many of them are teachers and coaches at the same time. They also show genuine care for their students."
TRIAD: STEPHANIE KAFER Academic rank - 2 of 257. Sports - Tennis. Academic bio - "I have been awarded three Student Appreciation Awards and I have been an Honors All-State Choral Musician three times. At the annual Worldwide Youth in Science and Engineering, I placed second and third in mathematics, second in chemistry and first in physics." Athletic bio - Tennis: State qualifier in 2018, placed first at the Mississippi Valley Conference in both No. 3 doubles and No. 6 singles, No. 3 singles champion at the Alton Robert Logan Memorial Tournament. Awarded the Teammate Award in 2017 and the Intensity Award in 2018. Activities - Participated in math club, musicals, choir, National Honors Society and Spanish Honors Society; volunteered at the YMCA in O'Fallon, Ill. as a counselor in training; active volunteer member of my church as I participate in the St. Jerome Youth Ministry and the annual Luke 18 retreat. College, major - Bowling Green State University, secondary math education. Goal - "I hope to become a teacher that students can look up to. My teachers have always inspired me to work hard and exemplify good character. My dream is to inspire students in ways my teachers have inspired me. I hope to do what I love every day - math." Favorite subject - Choir. Favorite book - "Harry Potter" by J.K. Rowling. Favorite musician - Imagine Dragons/Pentatonix. Role model - "I consider my parents as role models because they have consistently supported me in both my academics and sports. They have taught me so much about life and what it means to have good character. Their unending kindness and love has brought me to where I am today and I couldn't be more grateful."
TROY BUCHANAN: MORGAN BOVA Academic rank - 29 of 443. Sports - Basketball, soccer, track and field. Academic bio - Soccer: conference all-academic (2015-2019), Scholar Athlete Award; Basketball: conference all-academic (2015-2019), Scholar Athlete Award; Track: conference all-academic (2015-2019), Scholar Athlete Award; TBHS Scholar Athlete (2015-2019), GAC Scholar Athlete (2015-2019). Athletic bio - Soccer: first-team all-conference (2017-2018), second-team all-conference (2015-2017), all-district; Track: second-team all-conference (2015-2016), all-district (2016-2017), state qualifier (2016-2017); Trojan Elite Award, three-sport varsity letterman all four years with a 3.5 GPA. Basketball: second all-time in program assists. Activities - Student Council Vice President, Future Farmers of America, National Honor Society, A+ Program, Gold Scholar Recipient. College, major - McKendree University, biology. Goal - "I hope to become a successful physician's assistant in a dermatologist office and allow everyone to feel comfortable in their own skin. I hope to continue to grow as a person, meet new people, and make a positive impact on my community." Favorite subject - Psychology. Favorite book - "The Great Gatsby." Favorite musician - Khalid. Role model - "My biggest role model is my mom. Even though she has been a single parent for several years now, she continues to push through and do anything she has to for me and my brother. My brother and I have been quite a handful between school, sports and every other activity we do, but she never fails to cheer me on and support me in every way possible. I hope to become at least half of the woman she is today. She has driven me to become the person I am and I will be forever grateful."
TRINITY: EMMA FISCHER Academic rank - 3 of 88. Sports - Volleyball, soccer, swimming. Academic bio - Honor Roll all four years, outstanding achievement in art as a sophomore. Athletic bio - Volleyball: Lutheran St. Charles all-tournament team award two years in a row, MVP award as a junior, the Titan Award as a senior, first-team all-conference; Soccer: Second-team all-conference. Activities - Student Council all four years, Vice president as a junior, currently Student Council President, National Honor Society two years and I am also the Blood Drive Coordinator; NAHS senior year; Health Club senior year. College, major - Jefferson Community, nursing. Goal - "As an adult I hope to go into the healthcare field and use my knowledge to help those in need." Favorite subject - Science. Favorite book - "Divergent." Role model - "I consider my grandma to be my biggest role model. She is the definition of a strong woman. While working a full time job, she had to raise my mom all by herself. She has taught me that hard work and determination will help you reach your goals and to never let anything get in the way of your dreams. She pushes me to be the strong woman I am today and I hope when I am older I can be just like her."
UNION: TREVOR KELLY Academic rank - 2. Sports - Basketball, baseball, track and field. Academic bio - Academic All-State (baseball and basketball), top 10 student award (2016-2018). Athletic bio - Basketball: first-team all-conference, all-district, all-area, team MVP; Baseball: first-team all-conference, team Silver Slugger. Activities - National Honors Society, Varsity Club. College, major - United States Naval Academy, mechanical engineering. Goal - "I hope to become an outstanding leader and a fighter pilot in the United States Navy." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "Lone Survivor." Favorite musician - Toby Keith. Role model - "My parents because they have taught me to improve myself in every way possible, and they have put me in a position to succeed in life."
UNIVERSITY CITY: PETER ZHANG Academic rank - 1 of 137. Sports - Wrestling, soccer, tennis, cross country. Academic bio - Honor Roll all four years. Athletic bio - Two-time state wrestler, most improved soccer player. Activities - Member of Youth Leaders of Saint Louis. College - West Point Military Academy. Goal - "I hope to have four kids and give them everything that I wasn't able to have as a child growing up. I view one's childhood as a very important stage in a person's life and I would only feel fulfilled once I've nurtured some children of my own in the right fashion." Favorite subject - Psychology. Favorite book - "Jane Eyre." Role model - "Myself. There's no other like me on this earth, to think and view things in the way that I do. I inspire myself to continue to discover new experiences and be open minded."
URSULINE: SOPHIE LAPOSHA Academic rank - 1 of 105. Sports - Dance. Academic bio - Principal's Award, Scholar's Award and First Honor Roll for receiving and maintaining a 4.0 GPA or higher each semester (2015-2019), received annual Ursuline scholarship for high placement on the Iowa Basics tests (2015-2019), received an academic excellence award at the Missouri Dance Team Association state competition (2016-2019, and this year, my team won an award for having the highest team GPA in our division. As a junior year, I was the sole recipient of the Bausch and Lomb Science award for exemplary performance in science courses (2018). I have received the George Washington-Carver award for placing in the top 10 percent of my graduating class (2019). I also received the senior Math award for my dedication and success in mathematics (2019). I am a member of National Honor Society, Math Honor Society, Spanish Honor Society (2017-2019). I achieved a score of 36 on the ACT (Sept. 2018). Athletic bio - Captain of varsity dance team junior and senior year (2017-2019). In addition, I received the MVP award both my sophomore and senior year (2017, 2019). Ursuline "Scholar Athlete of the Month" award in November both junior and senior year (Nov. 2017, 2018). Won state with dance team in 2018. Activities - Member of National Honors Society, Math Honors Society, Spanish Honors Society and the National Society for Dance Arts. I am a member of my school's diversity team, an ambassador for Ursuline and went on two service trips with my high school - one freshman year to Whole Kids Outreach in Ellington, Mo., and another junior year to rehab homes in New Orleans. College, major - Butler University, actuarial science. Goal - "I hope to become an actuary and have a successful career where I can develop my leadership skills and passions. I want to grow into a better person each and every day, and I hope to do it all with the support of people I love." Favorite subject - "Easily, my favorite high school subject is math, especially AP Calculus. I appreciate that there is usually one right answer." Favorite book - "Station Eleven" by Emily St. John Mandel. Favorite musician - Sam Smith and any song that makes me want to dance. Role model - "My siblings, Andrew and Isabelle, are my biggest role models. They both work incredibly hard every day to make sure that the people around them are happy and to better themselves. They push me to be the best version of myself and keep a positive outlook on life."
VALLEY PARK: MADELYN KIENTZY Academic rank - 9 of 86. Sports - Softball, basketball, soccer. Academic bio - Gold Scholar award, High Honor Roll, Women in STEM, Student-Athlete of the month, Distinguished Student Leader, Math Department Award, A+ Program. Athletic bio - Basketball: First-team all-conference; softball: first-team all-conference; soccer: second-team all-conference. Activities - Student Council president, National Honor Society, Future Business Leaders of America, National Business Honor Society. College, major - Missouri State University, pre-med. Goal - Become a dermatologist. Favorite subject - Math Favorite book - "Divergent." Favorite musician - Dan and Shay. Role model - "My parents because they support me through everything and always believe in me. They have always pushed me to do anything and they are always by my side. They always keep me going."
VALMEYER: SARA ANDRES Academic rank - 1 of 25. Sports - Volleyball, softball, cheerleading. Academic bio - Illinois State Scholar, High Honor Roll (4 years), American Legion Auxiliary Illini Girls State Participant, Student of Character, National Honor Society, Oerter Charitable Foundation Outstanding Student. Athletic bio - 2018 Valmeyer volleyball MVP. Activities - National Honor Society Vice President, Future Educators of America Vice President, Vlameyer class of 2019 Vice President, Science Club Secretary, Fellowship of Christian Athletes Huddle Leader, Spanish Club, FFA, Pep Club, TREND, Big Brothers Big Sisters, Saturday Scholars, volleyball captain, cheerleading captain, softball captain, volunteer for St. Mary's Parish, Hills and Hollows, Fraternal Order of Police, American Legion Auxiliary. College, major - Maryville University, nursing. Goal - "I plan to attend school for six years to become a nurse practitioner and work in a clinic or hospital within the area. My goal is to become financially stable so I am able to travel the world." Favorite subject - English. Favorite book - "To Kill a Mockingbird" by Harper Lee. Favorite musician - Thomas Rhett. Role model - "I have many role models in my life, but my grandma stands out to me the most. My grandma is my role model because she teaches me what the most important things in life are. She has taught me to do everything with love and happiness. My grandma has always been hard-working, and she has taught me to never give up and work diligently."
VASHON: CHANZE CRUESOE Academic rank - 2 of 100. Sports - Basketball. Academic bio - Salutatorian. College - William Penn University. Goal - "I hope to play professional basketball overseas." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "To Kill a Mockingbird" by Harper Lee. Favorite musician - Lil Baby. Role model - "My mother. I've seen how hard she has worked to take care of me and my younger brother while going to college and being a single mother. I know it's been hard on her, but she wakes up every day doing things to make us happy; and I look up to her for that."
VIANNEY: JOSH KLEINHEIDER Sports - Basketball, golf. Academic bio - National Honor Society, Math Honors Society, Science Honors Society, honor roll, Order of the Griffin. Athletic bio - Golf: state qualifier (2016, 2018); Basketball: MBCA first-team all-district (2018, 2019), second-team all-conference (2018), first-team all-conference (2019), academic all-conference (2019). Activities - Special Olympics worker, school ambassador, Letterman's Club, volunteer for Friends of Kids with Cancer. College, major - Rockhurst University, biology. Goal - "I hope to become an orthodontist and be the best man I can be. I hope to be a great husband, dad, son to my parents and brother to my siblings." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "A Life Well Played: My Stories" by Arnold Palmer. Favorite musician - Mike Stud. Role model - "I consider my older brother, Ethan, to be my role model. He is a very hardworking kid that doesn't stop trying his best until he is satisfied, even then he still finds ways of improving. I have learned a lot over the years from him, whether it be in faith or in sports. Most importantly, he is always there by my side for support and I can talk to him about anything."
(Page C11)
VILLA DUCHESNE: MOLLIE GRIESEDIECK Sports - Basketball, lacrosse. Academic bio - National Honors Society, scored within the top 3 percent of test takers on the ACT, Distinguished Honor Roll every year of high school, Outstanding Achievement Awards for theology, english, science, and French throughout high school. Athletic bio - Lacrosse:Only defender on Villa's lacrosse team to be selected to the All-Metro team, all-conference for three years in a row, team captain; Basketball: team captain. Activities - President of Varsity Club and Women's Empowerment Club at Villa, charity work for Saint Vincent DePaul's clothing drive, officer of Villa Duchesne's Show Choir, Mock Trial team, volunteer at Bobby McCormack's Basketball Camp every summer, theater (four fall plays at DeSmet Jesuit High School and a musical at Villa), directed a one-act play freshman year. College, major - Notre Dame, business. Goal - "I hope to keep my athletic skill up throughout life, and find the balance between work and play; I want to have FUN in life but balance that with working hard (physically and mentally) and working in the sense of helping others through service. I believe the truest happiness comes when you can make a positive impact in someone else's life, and I hope to continue this value through adulthood." Favorite subject - History. Favorite book - "The Great Gatsby" by F. Scott Fitzgerald. Favorite musician - Khalid. Role model - "Malala Yousafzai. She turned her horrible experiences into a drive for female equality in education and other factors of life. She, to me, is a model of strength and perseverance, and I share her value of being passionate about equality of the sexes on every level."
VISITATION: SYDNEY GOODIN Sports - Volleyball. Academic bio - Rhodes College book, nominee for the Jefferson Scholarship at the University of Virginia, National Honor Society executive (2018) and president (2019). Athletic bio - MWAA all-conference (2018, 2019), district championship (2018), district runner-up (2017). Activities - Competitive horseback riding from age six-present with numerous rated championships throughout the nation, Spanish club, Alive STL, Christian Activity Center volunteer, National Honor Society. College, major - Oklahoma University or Miami of Ohio, international business. Goal - "I hope to study abroad in Spain and then eventually work abroad after college. I love to travel so I am hoping to see as much of the world as I can." Favorite subject - "My favorite subject is Spanish because I love being able to attempt to communicate with new people." Favorite book - "A Thousand Splendid Suns." Favorite musician - Bruno Mars, One Direction, the Dixie Chicks. Role model - "My role models are my parents. They are so strong and show me how to live up to my full potential every day. I am so thankful for their constant love and patience."
WARRENTON: NATHAN NORDWALD Academic rank - 2. Sports - Cross Country, track and field. Academic bio - NRECA Youth Tour Delegate, National Merit Scholarship Commended Student Athletic bio - Cross Country: four-time all-conference, four-time all-district, conference champion, district champion. Activities - National Honor Society President, Fellowship of Christian Athletes - Huddle Officer, Link Crew, A+ Tutoring. College, major - Missouri S&T, mechanical engineering. Goal - "I hope to become a head engineer for a major auto brand and design and test the automotive technology of the future." Favorite subject - Math and physical science. Favorite book - "20,000 Leagues Under the Sea." Favorite musical group/musician - Luke Combs. Role model - "I consider my grandfather to be a role model, as it seems as if no matter the circumstances, he is always able to find a solution to any problem."
WASHINGTON: CLAIRE AYERS Academic rank - 1 of 308 Sports - Cross Country, track and field. Academic bio - Four-time Outstanding Academic Achievers Award; Rotary Student of the Month; four- time Academic All-State Cross Country; two time Academic All-State Track. Athletic bio - Cross country: 2015 and 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch All-Metro second team; three-time all-conference; three-time Class 4 all-state (seventh place in 2015 and 2016, ninth place in 2018); 2016 Class 4 third-place team finish. Track: 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch All-Metro second team; 2018 Class 4 state championships: second place team, state champions in the 3,200 relay, second place 800, third place 1600. Activities - National Honor Society; Mu Alpha Theta; Student Council; Link Crew; Blue Jay Journal TV; volunteer for All Abilities Athletics; Junior Board Member of the Washington Overseas Mission. College, major - Southern Illinois University Carbondale, biological sciences. Goal - "I am not completely set on what I want to do, but I hope to work in some aspect of healthcare." Favorite subject - Biology. Favorite book - "The Hate U Give" by Angie Thomas. Favorite musical group/musician - Kali Uchis, Maggie Rogers, Brockhampton, Childish Gambino. Role model - "I have looked up to my brother Evan my whole life. He is always there for me to answer my questions and offer advice. He is selfless, loving and driven, and he never fails to make me laugh."
WATERLOO: SAMUEL KREINBERG Academic rank - 4 of 203. Sports - Golf, cross country, basketball, baseball. Academic bio - 4.0 club (2015-2019); High Honor Roll (2015-2019); Spanish Student of the Year (2016-2017); National Honor Society; Optimist Club Award (2017); Student of the Month (September 2018); Daughters of the American Revolution Good Citizen; Illinois State Scholar; 2019 Top Dog Award; State of Illinois Seal of Bi-literacy. Athletic bio - Mississippi Valley Conference champion, cross country (2017) and golf (2018); IHSA state finalist, cross country (2017), golf captain (2018), Mississippi Valley all-conference, golf (2018); Metro East Golf Coaches Association Class 2A all-area first team (2018); basketball team captain (2018-2019), 2018-2019 Basketball Character Award. Activities - National Honor Society, Renaissance, Math Team, Bulldog Advisory Council, powder puff cheerleader, middle school basketball bookkeeper, future Costa Rica traveler for Spanish. College, major - University of Arkansas, actuarial science. Goal - "As an adult, I simply wish to be a happy and healthy individual and find joy in everything I do." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "A Life Well Played" by Arnold Palmer. Favorite musical group/musician - J. Cole, Beastie Boys, Aerosmith. Role Model - "Last year, I was able to play a complete baseball season with Quinten Albrecht, currently a catcher at Wichita State University. It would have been easy for him to sit back and enjoy the fact that he knew he was playing college baseball. That was never an option for Q; not only was he the hardest worker on the team, he was the best teammate. For a quick story to show his character: I was on-deck in an inner-squad game, and I watched him crush a baseball over the right-field fence. After running around the bases, he gave high fives, and then went straight into the cage to work on his swing. This just proves his mentality of hard work and leading by example. I strive to be just like Q."
WEBSTER GROVES: MOLLY NASH Sports - Field hockey, track and field. Academic bio - Renaissance Award (four years), Honor Roll (four years), National Honor Society, Scholar Athlete (four years). Athletic bio - Athlete of the Year (track 2016); Rookie of the Year (field hockey 2016); Most Heart (field hockey 2017); Heart and Hustle (field hockey 2018); Statesmen Award (field hockey 2018); team captain (field hockey 2018, track 2019); first-team all-conference (field hockey 2018); all-star team (field Hockey 2018); all-state (track 2016-2018). Activities - Co-President Spanish Club; TASH (Teen Advocates for Sexual Health); Feminist Coalition; WGHS drumline and marching band; Social Justice Club; AGAPE Youth Group. College, major - University of Missouri- Columbia (Honors College), undecided. Goal - "I hope to just continue to learn and grow as a person. I want to learn languages and explore and try to understand the world. " Favorite subject - English. Favorite book - "Call Me By Your Name" or "The Stranger." Favorite musical group/musician - The Growlers or Beach House. Role Model - "My sisters are my biggest role models. They constantly amaze and inspire me to be my best self and show me how I wish to live my life. My sisters are strong, intelligent, weird and beautiful, and are the greatest friends I could ask for."
WESCLIN: NATE BREDE Academic rank - 1 of 100. Sports - Basketball, baseball. Academic bio - Illinois State University Presidential Scholar; 2018-2019 Illinois State Scholar; High Honors; Academic Letter Winner (2015-2018); Illinois High School Athletic Association Academic winner; honors for having the top three highest cumulative average in each subject each school year. Athletic bio - Basketball: named third-team all-state by IBCA (2018-19); 1269 career points; Okawville Invitational all-tournament team (2016-17 & 2017-18 & 2018-19); Duster Thomas Hoops Classic all-tournament team (2017-18); 2017-18 and 2018-19 all-Cahokia Conference team. Activities - Student Council, Treasurer; National Honor Society; Fellowship of Christian Athletes; Huddle Leader; Mighty Mentors; Time 4 Change; Math Team; WYSE/ACES; Special Olympics volunteer; fishing. College, major - Illinois State University, actuarial science. Goal - "As an adult, I would love to become an actuary and pass multiple actuary exams. Also, I would like to coach high school basketball." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "Of Mice and Men." Favorite musical group/musician - Weird Al Yankovic. Role model - "My family as a whole has been an outstanding role model; everyone from my grandpa to my sister are all outstanding role models. Although, if I had to pick just one, my dad has had an enormous impact on my life. His work ethic, strength as the head of the family and relationship with God are attributes that I hope I can come close to replicating throughout my life."
WESTMINSTER: WILL VESTAL Sports - Tennis. Academic bio - National Merit finalist; ACS Chemistry Olympiad National Qualifier. Athletic bio - Varsity tennis captain. Activities - Volunteer at Family Partners Adult Day Center; Spirit Leadership Team; FIRST Robotics team; National Honor Society; Scholar Bowl. College, major - University of Notre Dame, studying in the Mendoza School of Business. Goal - "I hope to be able to use whatever position I am in to give back and help others." Favorite subject - Government. Favorite book - "All the King's Men." Favorite musical group/musician - Florida-Georgia Line Role model - "My mom. She has taught me the value of hard work and striving for success throughout my life. These values have led me to be at the position I am at now."
WHITFIELD: CLAYTON STREGE Sports - Golf, basketball. Academic bio - Principal's Honor Roll (2015-2019). Athletic bio - Golf: district champion; team sectional runner-up; two-time district medalist; sectional medalist; two-time state qualifier. Activities - Part of the First Tee Chapter in the Greater St. Louis area; participate in Mindfulness Club and FCA Club. College, major - Xavier University, undecided. Goal - "I hope to make people laugh and always be myself." Favorite subject - Science. Favorite book - "The Hunger Games." Favorite musical group/musician - Kid Cudi. Role model - "Morgan Freeman because he is never afraid to be himself."
WINDSOR: AARON HARRISON Academic rank - 1 out of 206. Sports - Football, basketball, baseball. Academic bio - National Honor Society; Honor Roll (four years); AP Scholar, Rotary Club student of the month; second place at Jefferson College Math Competition Senior Division; Bright Flight; participate in Missouri Boys State and Missouri Scholars Academy. Athletic bio - All-State Academic Honor for football (junior and senior year); All-State Academic Honor for basketball (senior year); all-conference academic for football (senior year), basketball team captain. Activities - Special Olympics volunteer; Youth Leadership Council benefiting Make-A-Wish member; Sunday school teacher at Radiant Life Church; Student Council; Executive Board; Robotics team captain; National Honor Society; Drama Club member; Shakespeare Society member; Math Club member; Astronomy Club member; Science Club member; Spanish Club member; Fellowship Of Christian Athletes member. College, major - University of Missouri, biomedical engineering. Goal - "I plan to create new medical devices to help those in less fortune places of the world. I also want to help others by volunteering my time in many different areas. I would also like to travel the world." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "The Giver" by Lois Lowry. Favorite musical group/musician - Thomas Rhett. Role model - "I consider my parents to be my role model because of the way they act. My dad is always respectful and doing things for others, and my mother has always been loving and shows how much she cares about us."
WINFIELD: COLLIN SUTTON Academic rank - 14 of 106. Sports - Basketball, football, baseball. Academic bio - Academic all-state two times; Academic all- conference 10 times. Athletic bio - First-team all-state (baseball); second-team all-state (football); all-conference (baseball and football); all-district (baseball and football). Activities - Principal's Advisory Committee; reading; working out. College, major - Undecided, business. Goal - "I would like to own an international business, move to another state, preferably Arizona or Texas, and coach football." Favorite subject - History. Favorite book - "To Kill a Mockingbird." Favorite musical group/musician - J Cole. Role model - "Russell Wilson. He is a great man and leader in his community and for his team."
WOOD RIVER: SHAWN MCKEE Academic rank - 1 of 127. Sports - Football, basketball, baseball, trap shooting, scholar bowl. Academic bio - Silver Medallion; Silver Medallion Athlete of the Year; Illinois State Scholar; National Honor Society. Athletic bio - Football: Rookie of the Year; second-team all-conference linebacker; Chris Erwin Scholar Athlete of the Week; Silver Medallion Scholar Athlete of the Year. Activities - Student Council; Spirit Club; Transition Coach; Saturday Scholars; Senior Olympiad; Lewis and Clark Academic Challenge; Trebuchet competition; Mannie Jackson Center for Humanities Team; Madison County Youth Board; Junior Rotarian; Hugh O'Brian Youth Leadership (HOBY); Rotary Youth Leadership Awards (RYLA). College, major - Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, nursing. Goal - "I hope as an adult I will be able to support my family while also making a difference with my college degree in nursing. I hope to give back to my community whenever I am capable of doing so as an adult." Favorite subject - Biology and A&P. Favorite book - "Where the Red Fern Grows." Favorite musical group/musician - Tim McGraw. Role model - "I consider my dad the best role model. My dad is the hardest working man that I know and he has pushed me to be who I am today. He's the biggest supporter, teacher and greatest leader that I've ever met. He has inspired me to help others, which has led to me wanting to help as a nurse. As a result of his role models qualities, I want to follow in his steps in being the same great role model."
WRIGHT CITY: WILLIAM POHL Academic rank: 1 of 87. Sports - Basketball, track and field. Academic bio - Four-time Student of the Month; Academic Excellence Award in Science, Social Studies; four-time Principal Honor Roll Student; 4.2 GPA; Bright Flight; Summa Cum Laude. Athletic bio - Most Improved Player, basketball, 2017; Wildcat Award 2018, 2019. Activities - National Honor Society; P7 Bible Study; Fellowship of Christian Athletes; A+ Tutor Program; band; Sunrise UMC volunteer work on fish fries; mission trips, Special Olympics; trivia nights. College, major - Washington University in St. Louis, systems science and engineering with a minor in aerospace engineering. Goal - "To become an engineer at Boeing in St. Louis." Favorite subject - Math. Favorite book - "Inferno" by Dan Brown. Favorite musical group/musician - Hopsin. Role model - "Mr. William Garrett, because he is an excellent teacher, a humorous friend and a great father."

Graphic

 
 Photos of all scholar athletes. 

Load-Date: July 12, 2019


End of Document


West and north St. Louis County hit hardest by COVID-19, new data shows
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 4, 2020 Saturday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 809 words
Byline:  BY JOEL CURRIER St. Louis Post-Dispatch - Jeremy Kohler of the Post-Dispatch contributed to this report. 
Body


ST. LOUIS COUNTY - Pockets of north and west St. Louis County have seen the county's highest concentrations of COVID-19 cases, according to data released Friday.
A map released by the county shows infections by ZIP code, revealing some of the hardest-hit codes across swaths of largely unincorporated north St. Louis County. Other ZIP codes in the county with higher infection rates include parts of Chesterfield, Wildwood and Clarkson Valley as well as Pagedale, Hanley Hills, Berkeley and Edmundson.
The map showed the infection rate in each of those ZIP codes at more than 150 cases per 100,000 people but did not give actual case totals or details about those infected. County officials have been publishing the age ranges of COVID-19 patients separately on a health department website, showing those 50 to 59 make up the biggest share - more than 160 of the county's 781 cases - through Friday. Men and women have tested positive at about the same rate.
The county's seventh reported COVID-19 death was a woman in her 80s with underlying health conditions, officials said Friday. Authorities provided no other details.
"ZIP codes that have fewer cases should not become complacent or disregard the guidelines set forth," county police Sgt. Benjamin Granda said in a statement.
Since March 22, Granda said, "epidemiological investigations indicate there is clear evidence of community transmission in St. Louis County. Simply put, this is community spread. This should renew and reinforce the call for strict adherence to the stay-at-home order."
The county reported 44 new cases since Thursday, the day county officials announced the shutdown of all county parks through April 22. The city of St. Louis' more than 100 parks remain open for now.
St. Louis officials this week released a breakdown of the city by ZIP code showing the two hardest hit areas as 63115, which largely includes the Penrose neighborhood, and 63103, which covers much of Midtown. As of Friday, the 63115 ZIP code had 35 cases, the highest total of any city ZIP code. The city has at least 297 cases so far, with a near equal split among men and women. Officials announced four deaths Friday, bringing the city total to five.
Also Friday, responding to growing public pressure, Gov. Mike Parson put all Missourians under a stay-at-home order, mirroring moves already made by dozens of other U.S. states to combat the spread of COVID-19.
Among those calling for a statewide shelter order were the four Democrats on the seven-member St. Louis County Council who urged Parson in a letter to expand the "first responder" classification to include grocery store workers, pharmacy technicians, sanitation employees and janitors.
The classification would give those workers more access to benefits, including screening for COVID-19, protections at work and other financial benefits. Parson has previously said he would not classify grocery workers as first responders.
The council members told Parson that because of the lack of medical services in rural Missouri, St. Louis County was one of several large jurisdictions that would provide help to rural neighbors and that "as new hot spots form, additional resources will need to be expended to broaden the reach of service while maintaining that recovering areas are not re-exposed."
The letter was not signed by the three council Republicans, including Tim Fitch, R-3rd District, who said in an interview that he had less than an hour to see and support the letter before it went to Parson.
"It's not our place to tell the governor what he needs to do with the entire state," Fitch said.
Meanwhile, in St. Louis, Mayor Lyda Krewson said Friday that she thinks it's "very likely" the city's stay-at-home order will be extended past April 22, "but we have not made that decision. We will make that decision based on science and data" in the weeks ahead.
Krewson, too, said she personally asked Parson for the statewide shelter-in-place order. In the meantime, Krewson encourages people to stay home as much as possible and continue to practice social distancing in public places, predicting the coronavirus outbreak "is going to go on for a while."
On Friday, the city said it sent warning letters to a dozen businesses found to have violated recent restrictions on non-essential businesses or groups of 10 or more people. The list of non-compliant businesses includes a church, a barbershop, beauty product suppliers, car washes, a deli and a funeral home.
A day earlier, St. Louis County officials said more than 40 businesses had been warned to close after failing to comply with county orders issued to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.
---
CORONAVIRUS TOLL Cases/deaths as of 8 p.m. Friday
Missouri: 2,113/19 Illinois: 8,904/210 St. Louis: 297/5 St. Louis Co.: 794/7 St. Charles Co.: 151/6 Jefferson Co.: 62/1 Franklin Co.: 24/1 Metro East: 96/2

Notes

   LOCAL RESPONSE 


Graphic

 
 A cyclist using a mask joins others on Grant's Trail in Crestwood, hours before the trail closed to the public on Friday. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  St. Louis County workers place caution tape and signage at an entrance to Queeny Park in Ballwin on Friday. All county parks will be closed until at least April 22 to help slow the spread of the coronavirus. Photo by Colter Peterson, cpeterson@post-dispatch.com ---  Graphic map- COVID-19 CASES IN ST. LOUIS COUNTY As of April 3. (Shaded zip code map showing)   Cases per 100,000 population   <5   <=50   50.1-100   100.1-150   >150   NOTE: Data for ZIP codes with fewer than five cases was omitted by the county. SOURCE: St. Louis County 

Load-Date: April 4, 2020


End of Document


Major global warming study again questioned, again defended
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 8, 2017 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A16
Length: 721 words
Byline:  By SETH BORENSTEIN and MICHAEL BIESECKER Associated Press  
Body


WASHINGTON - Another round of bickering is boiling over about temperature readings used in a 2015 study to show how the planet is warming.
The issue is about how readings gathered decades ago were adjusted to try to get a clearer picture of how the Earth's temperature is changing now. Those adjustments have been questioned by some who reject mainstream climate science and have tried to claim there has been a pause in global warming.
A study released in January in a scientific journal used another set of measurements to confirm the readings and prove again that the Earth's temperature is rising quickly and that the warming has not paused.
But a congressional committee seized Tuesday on complaints from a retired scientist from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration about how the original data were handled to claim the data were falsified - even though the retired NOAA scientist they cite does not argue that it was.
What is being touted as a scientific scandal is more about data handling than what rising temperatures show, according to phone and email interviews with more than two dozen experts on the issue, including the former government scientist, whose blogging Saturday reignited a debate.
The hubbub was sparked when retired NOAA data scientist John Bates claimed in a blog post that his boss, then-director of the National Centers for Environmental Information Thomas Karl, "constantly had his ‘thumb on the scale' - in the documentation, scientific choices and release of datasets - in an effort to discredit the notion of a global warming hiatus" and rushed a study published in the journal Science before international climate negotiations.
Bates said in an interview Monday with The Associated Press that he was most concerned about the way data were handled, documented and stored, raising issues of transparency and availability. He said Karl didn't follow the more than 20 crucial data storage and handling steps that Bates established for NOAA. He said it looked as if the June 2015 study was pushed out to influence the December 2015 climate treaty negotiations in Paris.
However, Bates, who acknowledges that Earth is warming from man-made carbon dioxide emissions, said in the interview that there was "no data tampering, no data changing, nothing malicious."
"It's really a story of not disclosing what you did," Bates said in the interview. "It's not trumped-up data in any way shape or form."
Still, after Bates' blog post, the House Science Committee , a British tabloid newspaper and others who reject mainstream climate science accused NOAA of playing "fast and loose" with land and water temperature data.
House Science Committee Chairman Lamar Smith, R-Texas, speaking at a hearing Tuesday, called on Science to retract the 2015 study and blasted NOAA for not being cooperative with his subpoenas. When the journal's publisher Rush Holt, a physicist and former Democratic congressman, said the charges didn't support a retraction because the issue was more about data procedures than science, Smith, a lawyer, interrupted him and insisted: "They falsified global warming data."
Karl's study looked mostly at ocean temperature records several decades old and determined that those older readings skewed too warm when compared to modern monitoring from buoys and other devices because they were taken in ships' engine rooms. He adjusted those old readings down, which makes it clearer that the Earth's temperature is rising now.
Since then, a new independent study from the University of California, Berkeley looked at the same issue in a different way, and confirmed Karl's calculations.
"Not using their data we get the exact same results, both for the ocean record and for the land," said Zeke Hausfather, lead author of the Berkeley study. He called Bates' claims "all about procedural disagreements within NOAA that have very little bearing about our understanding about what's happening to Earth's climate."
Marcia McNutt, who was editor of Science at the time the paper was published and is now president of the National Academy of Sciences, praised Bates for wanting to highlight the importance of data archiving, but said his criticisms had little to do with the main part of the paper and chastised the House for using issues of data archiving to try to discredit the 2015 study.

Graphic

 
 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) CEO Rush Holt, a former Democratic congressman, testifies on Capitol Hill in Washington, Tuesday, Feb. 7, 2017, before the House Science Committee. He rebuffed claims by Republican members that federal climate science had been falsified. (AP Photo/Michael Biesecker) 

Load-Date: February 9, 2017


End of Document


New data: Americans filling far fewer opioid prescriptions
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 20, 2018 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 618 words
Byline:  By LINDA A. JOHNSON Associated Press  
Body


TRENTON, N.J. - The number of prescriptions for opioid painkillers filled in the U.S. fell dramatically last year, showing their biggest drop in 25 years and continuing a decline amid increasing legal restrictions and public awareness of the dangers of addiction, new data show.
Health data firm IQVIA's Institute for Human Data Science released a report Thursday showing an 8.9 percent average drop nationwide in the number of prescriptions for opioids filled by retail and mail-order pharmacies. All 50 states and the District of Columbia had declines of more than 5 percent. Declines topped 10 percent in 18 states, including all of New England and other states hit hard by the opioid overdose epidemic, such as West Virginia and Pennsylvania.
"We're at a really critical moment in the country when everybody's paying attention to this issue," said Michael Kleinrock, the institute's research director. "People really don't want them if they can avoid them."
There was an even greater drop in total dosage of opioid prescriptions filled in 2017, down 12 percent from 2016. Reasons for that include more prescriptions being written for a shorter duration, a 7.8 percent decline in new patients starting on opioid prescriptions and far fewer high-dose prescriptions.
Opioid doses are measured in "morphine milligram equivalents." (A standard Vicodin pill has the equivalent of 5 milligrams of morphine.)
Prescriptions for dosages of 90 morphine milligram equivalents per day or more, which carry the highest addiction risk, declined by 16 percent last year, according to the report.
The U.S. is estimated to consume roughly 30 percent of all opioids used worldwide.
Opioid prescriptions and daily doses rose steadily starting in the 1990s, fueled by factors including marketing of new opioid pills such as Oxycontin. Use peaked in 2011 at levels far above those in other wealthy countries where national health systems control narcotics more aggressively.
The U.S. decline began after overdoses and deaths from prescription opioids and illicit narcotics soared, and multiple groups sounded the alarm.
The federal government and about half of the states have enacted restrictions, such as limiting the dose or duration of opioids that can be prescribed. Insurers and drugstores began imposing similar limits on opioid use for acute pain, as opposed to cancer and chronic pain patients. The Drug Enforcement Administration increased prosecution of heavy prescribers.
Numerous medical groups have issued guidelines urging prescribers to offer other pain-management options when possible and to limit doses and duration of opioid prescriptions.
Despite those measures, deaths from drug overdoses have continued to increase in the U.S., and emergency rooms saw a big jump in overdoses from opioids last year, according to government data.
Doctors have been heeding the messages from medical groups, and some worry they'll be arrested or lose their license if they provide too many opioids, said Bob Twillman, executive director of the Academy of Integrative Pain Management, which represents doctors and others who treat pain patients and gets some funding from opioid makers.
"We get a lot of phone calls from patients whose primary care doctors have said they won't prescribe opioids at all," and want referrals to other doctors, Twillman said.
The opioid data are part of IQVIA's annual report on U.S. drug-spending trends. It noted that last year the total spent on prescription drugs, after multiple discounts and rebates that drugmakers give to middlemen, was $324 billion, up 0.6 percent.
The report forecasts that after such discounts, drug spending will rise by 2 percent to 5 percent annually for the next five years.

Load-Date: April 20, 2018


End of Document


States will start getting COVID-19 vaccine Monday, US says
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 13, 2020 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1081 words
Byline:  By MATTHEW PERRONE, MIKE STOBBE and MARK SCOLFORO Associated Press 
Body


WASHINGTON - The nation's first COVID-19 vaccine will begin arriving in states Monday morning, U.S. officials said Saturday, after the government gave the final go-ahead to the shots needed to end an outbreak that has killed nearly 300,000 Americans.
Trucks will roll out Sunday morning as shipping companies UPS and FedEx begin delivering Pfizer's vaccine to nearly 150 distribution centers across the states, said Army Gen. Gustave Perna of Operation Warp Speed, the Trump administration's vaccine development program. An additional 425 sites will get shipments Tuesday, and the remaining 66 on Wednesday.
Initially, about 3 million doses were expected to be shipped nationwide. It was unclear exactly who would receive the first shots, though health care workers and nursing home residents were the priority. Perna said health authorities would decide.
A similar number of shots will be held back for those recipients' second dose, which is needed for full protection from COVID-19.
The announcement Saturday kicks off a massive logistical operation involving the federal and state governments, private companies and health care workers to quickly distribute limited vaccine supplies throughout the U.S. It offers hope in a country grappling with surging COVID-19 infections and deaths, which are overwhelming hospitals and raising fears that things will only get worse as people gather over the holidays.
On Saturday, the U.S. had recorded more than 16 million cases of COVID-19, by far the most of any country in the world, according to data kept by Johns Hopkins University. The U.S. also leads the world in deaths related to the coronavirus, with more than 297,600, including a record 3,309 recorded on Friday.
Perna compared the vaccine distribution effort to D-Day, the U.S.-led military offensive that turned the tide in World War II.
"D-Day was the beginning of the end and that's where we are today," Perna said a news conference. But he added that it would take months of work and "diligence, courage and strength to eventually achieve victory."
MaineHealth, a network of 12 hospitals based in Portland, plans to provide an expected first delivery of nearly 2,000 vaccines to doctors, nurses and others facing risk as they treat COVID-19 patients, said Dr. Dora Mills, chief health improvement officer.
"It's almost hard for me to talk about without tearing up," Mills said Saturday. "This vaccine gives us some glimmer of light at the end of the tunnel."
The first shipments will leave Pfizer's manufacturing plant in Kalamazoo, Michigan, by truck and then be flown to regional hubs around the country. Medical distributor McKesson and pharmacy chains, including CVS and Rite-Aid, also are involved in the initial rollout and vaccinations at nursing homes and assisted living centers.
In a key distribution challenge, the vaccine, co-developed with BioNTech, must be stored and shipped at ultra-low temperatures - about minus 94 degrees Fahrenheit. Pfizer has developed shipping containers that use dry ice, and GPS-enabled sensors will allow the company to track each shipment and ensure it stays cold.
Distribution sites are mainly large hospitals and other facilities that are able to meet those ultra-cold storage requirements. Within three weeks, vaccines should be delivered to all vaccination sites identified by states, such as local pharmacies, Perna said.
The vaccine was timed to arrive Monday so health workers could receive the shots and begin giving them, Perna said.
Workers at Mount Sinai Hospital System in New York did a dry run this week to prepare for their shipment. In a clean room, pharmacists practiced making separate doses of a training vaccine and ensuring the freezer was kept at temperatures colder than in Antarctica.
"Not a lot of people have vaccinated for a large pandemic like this," said Susan Mashni, vice president of pharmacy at Mount Sinai. "So we want to make certain that we get it right. There's a lot of different moving pieces and parts."
At a meeting where an expert panel advising the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on vaccines unanimously endorsed the Pfizer shot, some said local health officials were struggling to ensure the vaccine is distributed fairly and to those most in need and to ease people's concerns about getting the shot.
But "the funding necessary for state and local health departments to carry out this program has been put in the deep freeze," said Dr. Jeffrey Duchin, a Seattle physician representing the National Association of County and City Health Officials.
The Food and Drug Administration authorized emergency use of the vaccine late Friday. It capped an unprecedented global race to speed vaccines through testing and review, chopping years off the normal development process.
The FDA found the vaccine highly protective with no major safety issues. U.S. regulators worked for months to emphasize the rigor and independence of their review, but President Donald Trump's administration pressured the agency until the final announcement. A top White House official even threatened to remove FDA chief Stephen Hahn if a ruling didn't come before Saturday, sources said.
Concerns that a shot was rushed out could undermine vaccination efforts in a country with deeply ingrained skepticism about vaccines.
"Science and data guided the FDA's decision," Hahn said Saturday. "We worked quickly because of the urgency of this pandemic, not because of any other external pressure."
While the vaccine was determined to be safe, regulators in the U.K. are investigating several severe allergic reactions. The FDA's instructions tell providers not give it to those with a known history of severe allergic reactions to any of its ingredients.
The FDA's vaccine director, Dr. Peter Marks, said the agency will carefully track any reports of allergic reactions in the U.S.
Next week, the FDA will review a vaccine from Moderna and the National Institutes of Health that appears about as protective as Pfizer's shot. On Friday, the Trump administration said it had purchased 100 million more doses of that vaccine on top of 100 million it previously ordered.
The announcement came after revelations that the White House opted not to lock in an additional 100 million doses of Pfizer's vaccine for delivery in the second quarter of 2021. The Trump administration contends the current orders plus those in the pipeline will be enough to accommodate any American who wants to be vaccinated by the end of the second quarter of 2021.

Graphic

 
 A health care worker organizes COVID-19 tests on Tuesday at a drive-thru testing center in Phoenix. Coronavirus cases and deaths continue to surge throughout the country. 

Load-Date: December 14, 2020


End of Document


'Food tech' company Benson Hill formally opens new headquarters in Creve Coeur
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 22, 2020 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A14
Length: 455 words
Byline:  BY BRYCE GRAY St. Louis Post-Dispatch 
Body


CREVE COEUR - Biotech firm Benson Hill, which touts itself as one of the fastest-growing food tech companies in the country, on Monday formally opened its new headquarters here - marking the occasion with an event that included a visit from U.S. Secretary of Agriculture Sonny Perdue.
The company combines biotechnology and data science to boost the nutritional attributes and sustainability of key crops and ingredients in the food industry. Much of its work has focused on improving staples such as soybeans, but the company has also landed contracts with food giants like Mars, helping the chocolate producer hone the genetic resilience of its cacao trees, which face growing risks from climate change and disease.
The St. Louis area claims the highest concentration of plant science doctorates in the world. Benson Hill said its new facility bolsters the region's position "at the forefront of the future of food."
"It's fascinating to see the combination of talent that you've put together here," said Perdue, speaking after a tour of the Benson Hill facility. "It's a fascinating effort here, and I wish you all the best."
The $52 million, 160,000-square-foot headquarters off North Warson Road will host an ensemble of experts in plant biology, agronomy, data analytics, machine learning, and food science. The building is housed within the 39 North plant science district, near other engines for agricultural research, such as the neighboring Danforth Plant Science Center.
Danforth Center researcher Todd Mockler co-founded Benson Hill in 2012 with Matt Crisp, the company's president and CEO. Benson Hill employs 190, and the new headquarters has capacity for 300. The company is working to fill a dozen positions now, said Crisp.
Essential employees began working in the building a couple months ago, with others phased in since then - a gradual approach taken amid the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.
Only a fraction of employees - 20% to 25% - are working inside the building now, but the new facility comes with features well-suited to the pandemic: "easy-to-sanitize furnishings," an air filtration system capable of eliminating airborne viruses, and fresh air circulation in lab spaces.
Executives lauded the building's opening on Monday, but noted that the work is more important inside, where experts will serve as a "bridge" between food producers and consumers.
"It's the convergence of these that creates real meaning," said Crisp. "This is really about the people. The people are the reason we're able to do this."
Mockler expressed excitement how resulting work could improve the lives of others through a better food system.
"That's just a milestone," he said of the building's completion. "It's not the final destination."

Graphic

 
 U.S. Department of Agriculture Secretary Sonny Perdue, left, bumps fists with Benson Hill co-founder Todd Mockler after a ribbon-cutting on Monday for the new Benson Hill building in Creve Coeur. Photo by Colter Peterson, cpeterson@post-dispatch.com 

Load-Date: September 22, 2020


End of Document


POLY-SCI MAJOR'S REALITY CHECK CAN BE FOUND IN THE NUMBERS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 6, 1997, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS PLUS, Pg. 07, JIM GALLAGHER COLUMN
Length: 523 words
Byline: Jim Gallagher
Body


Q. I take issue with your column (June 9) in which you challenged the value of a political science degree. You told a reader, "With a degree in political science, employers won't be beating down your door, so you'd better be thinking grad school."
I am majoring in political science. I am aware of no data showing that political science majors have difficulty finding jobs. Many industries hire people in my major.
A.. Profuse apologies. With your poli-sci bachelor's degree, I'm sure you'll have no trouble landing an entry-level position in the lawn care, telemarketing or retail grocery industries.
Pardon the sarcasm, but finding a job isn't the problem. With unemployment below 5 percent, nearly anybody breathing can land something.
The trick is finding a good job at good pay and benefits. Liberal arts majors start out behind people who learn the skills that employers pay up for.
First, let's look at the numbers. Then we'll suggest some strategies liberal arts students can use to boost their chances.
New poli-sci grads this year are landing jobs averaging $ 26,364, says the National Association of Colleges and Employers in Bethlehem, Pa. That's down 2 percent from last year, at a time when salaries are generally rising.
And poli-sci grads are among the better-paid grads in the non-techie majors.
English majors average $ 23,553, psychology brings in 23,315; history pays $ 24,688. Journalism majors are also miserably paid wretches, starting at a measly $ 23,826 (They pay you in bylines, kid).
Teachers are in demand, but they're still low on the pay rungs. A starting math teacher averages $ 24,356, an English teacher $ 23,900.
Those aren't starvation wages for a single person just starting out. But you won't be dining at Cardwell's.
 
Other majors do better.
Study business administration or accounting and you can count on about $ 30,000 to start. Pick economics and finance and it's $ 31,294.
Engineers and computer jocks really cash in. Petroleum and chemical engineers command $ 43,000 the moment they shed cap and gown. Computer and electrical engineers get $ 39,000, with mechanicals just behind at $ 38,000.
Industry can't find enough computer science grads. They are "sought by employers of all types and sizes," says the NACE, an organization of corporate recruiters and college placement officers. The average starting salary is up 6 percent this year to $ 37,215.
 
And therein may lie salvation for the liberal arts folks.
Computer experts are in such short supply that companies are willing to hire Shakespeare scholars with a little computer background.
"They don't expect an English major to be a computer scientist," said Camille Luckenbaugh of NACE. "But if you've had three computer science courses, it shows you have the ability to learn.
 
"They can bring you aboard and teach you," she said.
 
So, learn some computer science along with your Hobbs and Locke.
Luckenbaugh has another tip for liberal arts job-seekers: Get an internship.
She's now tabulating a survey that asked employers what most impresses them about a new graduate. About 95 percent mention an internship.
 
If all else fails, marry a petroleum engineer.

Load-Date: October 7, 1997


End of Document


Drama ends for Monsanto: Bayer buys it for $66 billion
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 15, 2016 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1423 words
Byline:  By Jacob Barker St. Louis Post-Dispatch  Lisa Brown of the Post-Dispatch, Reuters and the Associated Press contributed to this report. 
Body


- Slight increase in offer wins over Monsanto board - Merger creates seeds and crop chemicals giant - World HQ of Bayer's seed business will be here - Jobs, funding for charities here could face cutbacks
For four months, the St. Louis area has watched as another of the region's marquee corporate names moved closer to being swallowed up by a larger company.
The drama appears to have ended Wednesday, after German biotech giant Bayer won over Monsanto's management with an offer of $128 a share in cash. The $66 billion deal is the largest all-cash transaction on record, topping the prior record set in 2008 when brewer InBev bought Anheuser-Busch for $52 billion.
Buying Monsanto, the global seed market leader, will give Bayer more than a quarter of the world market for seeds and pesticides, both companies said Wednesday.
Creve Coeur-based Monsanto's board of directors, Bayer's board of management and Bayer's supervisory board have unanimously approved the agreement. The deal is expected to close by the end of 2017, pending regulatory approvals and approval by Monsanto shareholders.
Like the losses of McDonnell Douglas, Trans World Airlines, Anheuser-Busch and Ralston Purina, the Monsanto deal eliminates yet another headquarters for a market leader that gave the St. Louis region recognition across the world.
Monsanto said Wednesday that it had 4,100 area employees, most of them at headquarters and offices in Creve Coeur and lab space in Chesterfield. That figure does not include hundreds of contractors, remote workers or temporary employees.
Executives emphasized that the combined company would retain a strong St. Louis presence; but Bayer, based in Leverkusen, Germany, has committed to finding $1.5 billion in "synergies" over the next three years, most of them in general and administrative expenses.
The seed and traits business and the combined company's North American commercial headquarters will be based in the St. Louis area, and its global Crop Protection and overall Crop Science headquarters will be based in Monheim, Germany. The combined company also will keep an important presence in Durham, N.C., where Bayer's U.S. crop science headquarters is based, and its digital agriculture platform will be based in San Francisco, the home of Monsanto's farm-data subsidiary Climate Corp.
"We believe that this combination with Bayer represents the most compelling value for our shareowners, with the most certainty through the all-cash consideration," Monsanto Chairman and Chief Executive Hugh Grant said in a statement.
Grant said he thought the deal would ultimately be "a good thing" for St. Louis because Bayer had an incentive to invest in the region's strong pool of plant science talent and engage with vibrant ag-tech startups. The future of St. Louis in the larger organization was an important piece of the two companies' discussions, he said.
"It doesn't sound like it, but I'm a St. Louisan," Grant said, joking about his thick Scottish accent. "And I've lived there for the last 20 years and raised my family there. … St. Louis becomes the global center for seeds and traits R&D, and St. Louis becomes the national hub for North America."
Monsanto Chief Technology Officer Robert Fraley called the deal "bittersweet."
"I'm really proud of what Monsanto has accomplished in launching traits and getting into the digital ag space," he said in a phone interview with the Post-Dispatch.
But ultimately, joining Bayer has the same logic to it that Monsanto's unsuccessful bid for Syngenta last year did. The seed leader wants to catch up with rivals in crop chemicals now that its patent has expired on the blockbuster Roundup herbicide, which it pioneered as a pairing with corn and soy that it genetically modified to survive Roundup applications.
"Bayer has a world class crop chemical business," Fraley said. The deal "creates great synergies with seeds and traits and data sciences."
Bayer, known for more than a century as the maker of aspirin, isn't the first drug company to acquire Monsanto.
In 2000, Monsanto merged with pharmaceutical company Pharmacia. Less than three years later, it reemerged as a local company. As part of drugmaker Pfizer's deal to buy Pharmacia, Monsanto was spun off as a stand-alone agricultural chemical and biotech company, leaving its 100-year history in chemicals and drugs behind to focus solely on the genetically engineered seeds that transformed agriculture.
And this deal isn't done yet. Bayer's offer includes a fee of $2 billion should the transaction fail to get regulatory clearance, a process the market appears to view as uncertain.
Monsanto's shares closed up just 0.6 percent at $106.76 Wednesday, leaving them nearly 17 percent below Bayer's offer. Bayer's shares in Frankfurt also rose 0.6 percent.
"They're essentially reflecting a regulatory approval process that is going to be really difficult to get through," Edward Jones analyst Matt Arnold said of the trading in Monsanto. "I like to listen to what the stock market tells you; and what the stock market is telling you is, it's a flip of a coin."
The deal follows a wave of consolidation in the agrichemical industry, partly touched off by Monsanto's failed bid last year to buy Swiss rival Syngenta. After rebuffing Monsanto's overtures, Chinese state-owned company ChemChina announced a deal to buy Syngenta. Meanwhile, Dow and Dupont are in the midst of a tie-up.
Ultimately, the $128-per-share offer came in lower than what some analysts had predicted Monsanto could command based on its strong research and development pipeline and the math it used to value Syngenta. But with a struggling agriculture economy because of low commodity prices, Monsanto ended up selling near the bottom of the market.
Arnold suspects the deal was pushed over the finish line by shareholders unwilling to wait for some of the value in Monsanto's longer-term research to blossom. Monsanto's CEO Grant said as recently as April that it no longer saw large-scale mergers as a strategy and that it was better positioned than competitors to combine seed, chemical and data services into a comprehensive package for farmers.
"In our mind we thought Monsanto had a compelling case to ask for over $140" a share, Arnold said. "The board had a fiduciary duty in an era of activist shareholders pushing them to do what's best for shareholders, whether they're short-term or not."
The Monsanto name may go away as the seeds and traits business becomes just one division of a giant conglomerate that also makes pharmaceuticals and other health-care products. When Monsanto courted Syngenta last year, it indicated that it was open to changing a corporate name that has gathered a fair amount of stigma because of opposition from groups that oppose Monsanto's development of genetically modified crops.
Grant said the tie-up was focused on "innovation," product research and the combined product line the two companies could offer to farmers.
"We haven't discussed that (rebranding), but we have said in the past when we looked at previous transactions that that was something we would be flexible on," Grant said in a call with reporters.
Bayer said it would raise the cash to pay for Monsanto by issuing debt and $19 billion in equity, including a mandatory convertible bond and a rights issue.
At a total deal value of close to $66 billion - based on 442 million Monsanto shares and the U.S. company's net debt of $9.3 billion at the end of May - it will be the largest transaction ever involving a German buyer.
It would trump Daimler's 1998 merger with Chrysler, which valued the U.S. carmaker at more than $40 billion.
Monsanto and Bayer were talking as early as March about ways to combine their businesses. Bayer went public with a $122-a-share takeover proposal in May, sweetened it to $125 in July and then increased it to $127.50 earlier this month.
---
CROP SCIENCE REVENUE SPLIT 2015 Fiscal year
By segment*
Monsanto Cotton S&T 4% Other crops 3% Corn S&T 40% Ag productivity 32% Soybean S&T 15% Vegetable seeds 5%
Bayer Fungicides 28% Herbicides 27% Insecticides 15% Seeds 12% Enviromental Science 8% Seed Growth 9%
By region
Monsanto Canada 4% Mexico 4% Other 1% U.S. 57% Brazil 11% Europe-Africa 12% Asia-Pacific 5% Argentina 6%
Bayer Europe 30% Latin America 29% North America 26% A-Pac 15%
*By segment figures add up to 99 percent. SOURCE: Bayer
---
DEAL CREATES A DOMINANT COMPANY IN AGRICULTURE
Pro forma sales In billions
Monsanto $14.1 Bayer $11.5 (Total) $25.6
ChemChina and Syngenta $16.4 DuPont and Dow $16.2 BASF Ag $6.4
SOURCE: Bayer

Graphic

 
 The Bayer Cross: the company's trademark since January 6, 1904 (2004)  Sign at the entrance to the Monsanto headquarters in Creve Coeur, Mo. Officials with biotech giant Bayer of Germany confirmed on Wednesday, Sept. 14, 2016, that it has reached an agreement to merge with agri-tech giant and St. Louis-based Monsanto, in a deal worth $66 billion. Photo by Christian Gooden, cgooden@post-dispatch.com  Soybean plants grow in a growth chamber at the Monsanto Chesterfield Village facility in Chesterfield, Missouri, U.S., on Thursday, April 15, 2010. Monsanto Co., the world's biggest seed company, plans to complete most of its $800 million stock buyback plan more than a year ahead of schedule after the shares dropped to the lowest since 2007. Photographer: Daniel Acker/Bloomberg  FRIDAY, JUNE 29, 2001 -  Monsanto has developed a strain of corn that is resistant to the corn root worm. At left, is the genetically engineered strain of corn that is resistant to the worm. At right is a normal strain. Both were intentionally infested with the root worm in Monsanto's test fields in Monmouth, Ill. The roots have been partially eaten away in the normal strain of corn. PHOTO BY JERRY NAUNHEIM JR.  FILE - This July 5, 2008 file photo shows a farmer holding Monsanto's Roundup Ready Soy Bean seeds at his family farm in Bunceton, Mo.   A high stakes dispute over soybeans comes before the Supreme Court, with arguments taking place Tuesday.  (AP Photo/Dan Gill, File)  Tuesday 09/05/06- Huifen Zhu ,29, a Post Doctorate Reasearcher at the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, researches some elements of basic plant science. The Center just announced a $15 million dollar gift from the Monsanto Fund, to help support the Center's "Campaingn for a Green Future," and also helping to develop high-yeild crops for Africa.  Dawn Majors | St. Louis Post-Dispatch  Thursday 6/28/2007--Prince Addae, a Monsanto researcher, uses tweezers to collect confirmation tissue samples from cotton plants that have been genetically engineered to be resistant to drought.  The tissue sampling is by way of insuring that the gene they have engineered is indeed expressed in the plant.  They will sample tissue as many as three times to insure their work is accurate.  This is in a Monsanto growth chamber at the Pfizer facililty in Chesterfield, Mo.  Kevin Manning | Post-Dispatch  This Aug. 31, 2015, file photo, shows the Monsanto logo on display at the Farm Progress Show in Decatur, Ill. (AP Photo/Seth Perlman, File)  St. Louis Post-Dispatch graphic - Crop science revenue split SOURCE: Bayer   St. Louis Post-Dispatch graphic -Deal creates a dominant company in agriculture SOURCE: Bayer  

Load-Date: September 16, 2016


End of Document


In move to reopen, counties in St. Louis area take varying paths
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 30, 2020 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 977 words
Byline:  BY ROBERT PATRICK AND ERIN HEFFERNAN  St. Louis Post-Dispatch - Jeremy Kohler and Jack Suntrup of the Post-Dispatch contributed to this report.  
Body


Missouri Gov. Mike Parson earlier this week released a blueprint for reopening the state amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Since then, two St. Louis-area counties have said they will follow suit, and two others have said they will stick with plans to shelter in place. The mayor of Eureka, in St. Louis County, said his city will defy the county's order to stay closed.
And on Wednesday, the head of the Missouri Gaming Commission said the state's 13 casinos might not open until May 15 or later, in part because of conflicting rules across jurisdictions in the state.
The piecemeal reopening is emblematic of differing opinions on how to deal with the virus across sectors including politics, science, business and health.
Franklin County, where there have been 112 cases and 13 deaths, was the first in the St. Louis area to announce a relaxation of the rules, starting last Saturday, even before Parson's changes went into effect. Most of the county's reported cases are in one nursing home.
"The numbers (of coronavirus cases) simply cannot justify what is impacting everybody's lives right now," Franklin County Presiding Commissioner Tim Brinker said.
But state rules still in place limiting the size of gatherings blunted the immediate effect.
On Tuesday, the executives for Jefferson and St. Charles counties announced they will follow Parson.
All three have infection rates less than half of those in St. Louis city and county, and officials have said that their case count is lower outside of hot spots in long-term care facilities.
Among the White House specifications that must be met for a state to reopen is a "downward trajectory" of cases. The guidelines can be modified for rural or suburban areas that have suffered more mild outbreaks, however.
A 14-day rolling average of new cases in Jefferson County, prepared by the Post-Dispatch using state data, does not show a decreasing trend. But state data often lags county data, and the number of new cases in that county is often in the single digits.
Jefferson County reports a total of 273 positive cases, including six more new cases Wednesday, and four deaths. Officials say 105 cases are linked to long-term care facilities, but that total includes some workers from outside the county who aren't included in the 273-person total.
A county health department spokeswoman did not respond Wednesday to emailed questions about the statistics.
At a St. Charles County Council meeting Monday, County Executive Steve Ehlmann presented data showing a downward trend in new cases, using a rolling 14-day average.
The county's peak occurred April 12, the data show. The county has traced the close contacts of those who have tested positive for the virus since the first known case appeared March 18, according to the presentation.
Ehlmann has stressed that businesses in St. Charles County were never ordered to shut down. Residents and businesses were allowed to determine what activities were essential.
St. Louis County has reported 3,060 cases and 159 deaths, and St. Louis has had 1,126 cases and 60 deaths.
St. Charles County has 596 reported cases and 34 deaths.
Another pillar for reopening, according to health officials, is the availability of widespread testing, but those numbers are hard to come by on a county level. Private labs don't report their testing statistics to local officials, and the state doesn't yet report coronavirus tests by county.
Dr. Alex Garza, head of the St. Louis Metropolitan Pandemic Task Force, said the state has embarked on a study of the prevalence of coronavirus infections in certain areas of the state, and there has been discussion in the St. Louis area of doing the same.
St. Louis Mayor Lyda Krewson on Tuesday tweeted that she does not believe that relaxing stay-at-home restrictions "ought to be a ‘one size fits all' issue." She said officials there were making decisions "based on the best available data & science we have," and that the city needs to wait at least 14 days after the peak of cases.
Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker has said the same. He's repeatedly said that the health of state residents is his primary concern, and said models show a second wave of infections and deaths if the economy is opened too quickly. But he's also repeatedly been questioned at his daily news conferences about rural parts of the state that have few or no cases and want to be treated differently. He said that he had made an effort in a revision of rules to allow "certain areas to do more than other areas."
Parson on Wednesday said he would reevaluate the situation if coronavirus cases spike.
Garza was asked Wednesday whether the reopening of some counties in the region could undermine others. "Any time you do something that increases the probability of transmission you're always worried about the number of cases that come along with it. But really the key is how do we decrease the rate of transmission," he said.
One of the many communities chafing at restrictions that have cost millions of jobs around the country is Eureka, where Mayor Sean Flower on Tuesday night announced plans to reopen the city on Monday. "We can no longer follow the rules we are under without economic ruin," Flower wrote in a Tuesday news release.
On Wednesday, St. Louis County Executive Sam Page said any businesses that open in the St. Louis County portion of the Eureka area should get legal advice, adding they may have a "complicated relationship with their insurance carriers" if employees or customers were exposed to COVID-19.
Parson said, "If you're within a city, within a county, and they've got that order in place, you're going to follow that county rule."
---
CORONAVIRUS TOLL Cases/deaths as of 8 p.m. Wednesday
Missouri: 7,425/318 Illinois: 50,355/2,215 St. Louis: 1,126/60 St. Louis Co.: 3,060/159 St. Charles Co.: 596/34 Jefferson Co.: 273/4 Franklin Co.: 112/13 Metro East: 852/59

Notes

   RELAXING RESTRICTIONS 


Load-Date: April 30, 2020


End of Document


Business Calendar
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 16, 2020 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 322 words
Body


TUESDAY
MARKETING - The Nonprofit Marketers Network-St. Louis hosts its annual Spectrum conference for nonprofit marketers, communicators, fundraisers and leaders. The digital conference includes keynote speakers Katie Stuckenschneider from Forest Park Forever, Maryanne Dersch of Courageous Communications, and Vincent Flewellen from Webster University. - 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. - $69 for members and students; $89 for nonmembers. Visit shorturl.at/bdhD6 to register.
SALES - This Earning Curve Series virtual event features Ryan Bretsch of Spoke Marketing on how sales enablement makes a revenue and profitability impact. - 10-11 a.m. - Free; register: https://bit.ly/377eKqY
STRATEGIC PLANNING - This Earning Curve Series virtual event features Marc Bowers of St. Louis Makes on strategic planning for middle market firms and manufacturers. - 11 a.m. to noon - Free; register: https://bit.ly/3lEEX4m
WEDNESDAY
MANUFACTURING - St. Louis Makes offers this webinar on maximizing manufacturing tax incentives for your business. - 10-11 a.m. - Free to active manufacturers; register: https://bit.ly/3lQsF9d
THURSDAY
SOCIAL CURRENCY - Venture Cafe offers this Zoom meeting featuring Cecil John, author of "Social Currency," discussing the social impact of bitcoin and cryptocurrency. - 3-4 p.m. - Free; register: https://bit.ly/318ltgv
DATA SCIENCE - Venture Cafe and General Assembly offer this introductory workshop on how modern businesses harness the power of data to drive innovation. - 4-6 p.m. - Free; register: https://ga.co/2GYshGN
OCT. 23
ACCOUNTABILITY - The St. Louis Regional Chamber and Psychological Associates present this Voices of the Region speaker series event featuring Jeanet Wade of Jalapeno Consulting discussing the skill sets leadership and management teams need to achieve a higher level of accountability in their organizations. - 10-11 a.m. - $10 for chamber members, $20 for nonmembers. Register: https://bit.ly/3iTthc8

Load-Date: October 16, 2020


End of Document


Fever-monitoring company places Missouri at top of watchlist for coronavirus surge
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 20, 2020 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A16
Length: 678 words
Byline:  BY MICHELE MUNZ St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


ST. LOUIS - A health data company that tracks fevers with its internet-connected thermometers has placed Missouri at the top of its watchlist for a surge in COVID-19 cases in the next few weeks.
Kinsa Health, which created its smart thermometers eight years ago as an early warning system for the flu and other viruses, has sold or given out more than 1.5 million thermometers across the U.S. The thermometers are connected to an app, where users can also enter symptoms and receive advice.
With 83% to 99% of people with coronavirus infection experiencing fever, the thermometers now act as an early warning for outbreaks of COVID-19.
"We are seeing people the minute they become symptomatic and have that first inkling of, 'Oh I kind of don't feel well. I'm going to go take my temperature,'" said Nita Nehru, Kinsa's head of communications.
It can take several days before a person finally decides to make an appointment to get tested, then even longer to get results. The average time currently is three days, said Lisa Cox, spokeswoman for the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services.
Kinsa looks for unusual levels of fever in communities and an increasing rate of transmission among other thermometer users.
"Then we apply machine learning and data science to understand bigger trends for the entire population outside of just what's happening with the thermometer users," Nehru said.
So far during the pandemic, Kinsa's data gathered has been fairly accurate at predicting outbreaks three to four weeks in advance, according to an analysis by the New York Times.
In Missouri, Kinsa saw a steep increase in fevers and rates of transmission from mid to late June, which led to a spike in new coronavirus cases from mid to late July.
The numbers of new cases dropped throughout the first of half August; however, fevers and rates of transmission increased - and at a rate faster than any other state, Nehru said.
"We need to alert in Missouri and let them know that we are seeing this, and we have seen this in the past and it's following the same trajectory," she said. "That, coupled with the fact that schools are opening soon, led us to be concerned about a big surge and an even bigger surge in Missouri when schools reopen."
Areas within the state that are of particular concern, she said, include St. Louis, St. Louis County, St. Charles County and more recently Jackson County, which includes most of Kansas City.
UrbanFootprint, an urban planning software company, also includes Missouri on its list of top five states likely to see case spikes in the coming weeks.
The company uses Kinsa's data as well as signs of movement and traveling. It also considers risk factors that make communities vulnerable such as unemployment, risk of eviction and food insecurity.
Other states on the list are Washington, Illinois, Michigan and Texas.
The predictions are not exact, Nehru said. Kinsa is unable to forecast the number of cases or how long a surge will last.
The companies hope that local health departments, governments and relief agencies can use the warnings to consider business restrictions, prepare for increased needs for testing and medical supplies, and ramp up services such as food and rental assistance.
In response to requests for comment about Kinsa's warning, officials with the St. Louis, St. Louis County, St. Charles County and state health departments sent emails to the Post-Dispatch.
The officials stated that they rely on the expertise and data from multiple state and local agencies in determining strategies.
The St. Louis Department of Health pointed out that cases in the city have slowly declined since July 12, and the department's surveillance has not shown an increase above expected levels of fever or respiratory complaints.
Nehru said getting Kinsa's warning out to the public is also important.
"You can get that information to the person sitting in their home wondering, ‘Do I need to be increasing the disinfecting I'm doing at home? Do I need to be wearing a mask? Should I be more cautions going around my 90-year-old grandmother?'"

Load-Date: August 20, 2020


End of Document


'SCIENCE' OF COMEDY: YEAH, RIGHT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 28, 1993, WEDNESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE; Pg. 1D
Length: 327 words
Body


WHO KNEW?  Late last spring, the nation had just begun to wallow in the story of teen-age small-arms expert Amy Fisher and her alleged paramour, Joey Buttafuoco. Entertainers' efforts to mine comedy out of the incident brought mixed results.  In his "Late Night" monologue of June 3, David Letterman offered what may have been his first of hundreds of such jokes, an effort so early that it omitted the magic element that has come to guarantee a laugh: the word "Buttafuoco." During his visit to St. Louis last week, I confronted Letterman with this previous failure.  "The research hadn't been done at that point," he said defensively. "We were still profiling it, still charting it, and we had some boys in R&D taking a look at it. We just didn't have the data that we have now. 'We were ignorant! I'll admit it! We were kids! We didn't know then that it IS: Buttafuoco.' " Earlier this month, in fact, "Buttafuoco" turned up as one of the "Top-10 Signs Larry King Is Losing His Mind." Letterman explained how it came to be: "Rob Burnett (one of the show's writers) says to me, 'I want to try this. I just want to put this in. I'm sorry because I know it's not going to get a laugh, but just for my satisfaction, can you put this in?' Because he's so discouraged that any mention of, now, just the word, not even a name - it's just the noun 'Buttafuoco' - seems to get great recognition and a laugh.
"And I said, 'OK. That's fine. Let's put it in. It's not that big a deal.  Plus, it might get a laugh.' And he said, 'Yeah, I guess it might.' " The exchange proved prophetic.  "If you saw it, it was terribly discouraging," Letterman said, his voice rising in amazement, "because it got a HUGE laugh. For NO reason. But then again, it's something that everybody has perpetuated. So they (the audience) are not entirely to blame because we've been using it for just that purpose." Profiling. Charting. Research and development. Data. Science. Comedy.  Buttafuoco.


Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo Headshot - Joey Buttafuoco

Load-Date: October 7, 1993


End of Document


African-American participation in elite AP classes lags at St. Louis area schools
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 22, 2016 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 3160 words
Byline:  Story By Elisa Crouch Data analysis by Walker Moskop St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


In high schools throughout the St. Louis area, stark racial differences persist in terms of which students are progressing to the most advanced classes - a divide that threatens the ability of African-American students to prepare for college.
Tens of thousands of black students aren't enrolling in calculus or Advanced Placement classes - long considered the gold standard for college readiness.
That's true at most predominantly black high schools, which are less likely to provide rigorous course offerings.
But it's also true in the suburbs, where predominantly white high schools offer a much broader range of opportunities.
Even there, African-American students are grossly underrepresented in elite classes.
Having the classes on a high school transcript can help a student get into selective colleges and universities. Passing the AP exam can result in college credit, saving students thousands of dollars in tuition. And study after study shows that students who take advanced courses are more likely to succeed in earning a degree.
Yet although black students make up 36 percent of enrollment in St. Louis County high schools, they made up just 12 percent of the enrollment in Advanced Placement classes in 2014-15, according to data from 25 school districts.
In St. Charles County high schools, black students make up 7.7 percent of enrollment, and 3.6 percent of enrollment in AP courses.
The disparity is even more stark for calculus.
It's a divide that has increasingly drawn the attention of suburban districts over the years, though they have had limited success in addressing it.
Reasons for the inequities are complex. African-American students are more likely than white students to come from low-income households - a risk factor for academic success. And even when poverty isn't a factor, black students are less likely to be in district preschool, gifted programs and in accelerated math in middle school.
By the time they get to high school, they may be less prepared for rigorous classes.
But education experts here and elsewhere say cultural barriers in the classroom also are at play, ones that discourage even well-prepared African-American students from signing up for challenging classes, particularly AP.
Those barriers include teachers and counselors who may not see the potential of black students.
Maxine Birdsong, a social worker at Ladue Horton Watkins High School, said she frequently saw black students who doubted their abilities.
"Somewhere, somehow you've been disconnected from your brilliance," she said she told them. "I apologize to you as an educator. Somehow we have failed you."
That disconnect is something that several dozen students and parents interviewed by the Post-Dispatch over this school year say they have experienced.
In 2014 Bersabeh Mesfin got a taste of what it's like to be a black honors student at the start of her sophomore year at Clayton High School.
On the first day of class, she walked into an honors science course and was met with a puzzled look on her instructor's face. "Are you supposed to be here?" she remembers his asking.
To Bersabeh, now a junior at Parkway West High, the question carried a familiar subtext. It's a feeling of being treated as an outsider, of being held to a lower set of expectations.
"It's a comment I bet a lot of African-Americans hear," said Bersabeh, who hopes to become a surgeon. "And I bet it's not a question he would have asked a Caucasian."
ACCESS AND EXPECTATIONS
The shortage of black students in rigorous courses has partly to do with access.
Area high schools with the highest concentrations of black students tend to provide the least exposure to rigorous classes, such as calculus and AP.
The Post-Dispatch gathered information on AP enrollment at all district high schools in St. Louis, St. Louis County and St. Charles County, as well as Madison and St. Clair counties in Illinois. Other area counties with smaller African-American enrollment were not included in the analysis.
In the 2014-15 school year, McCluer-South Berkeley, Roosevelt and Vashon high schools - where at least nine out of 10 students are black - offered just one AP class each. Normandy High, with a mostly black enrollment, offered none.
Elsewhere in the region, Lindbergh, Francis Howell Central, Lafayette and Timberland high schools - where about eight or more out of 10 students are white - offered 20 or more AP classes last school year, with options including music theory, macroeconomics, statistics and environmental science.
Data from Illinois, meanwhile, suggest that the disparities are less severe in the Metro East. East St. Louis and Cahokia high schools - which are predominantly black - offered eight and six AP courses in the 2014-15 school year, respectively. Edwardsville and Alton high schools, both predominantly white, offered 11 and 13 AP courses, according to state data.
Access for under-represented minorities is increasingly a concern of the College Board, the nonprofit organization that oversees the development of Advanced Placement curriculum and testing. The organization has been pushing for expansion of the courses into schools whose students are the most disadvantaged.
But the board is also urging superintendents and principals to improve access in more diverse schools where minority participation in these classes is low. The College Board's own data show that many capable minority students aren't enrolling.
"Nationally, all black, brown or Latino kids who have potential should be in them," said Wendell Hall, a senior director at College Board. "What we've found when looking at the data, often times a kid has the potential, the class was offered, but the kid wasn't in there," he said.
In many high schools, to sign up for AP classes a student must express interest and have a counselor's support. Teacher input also comes into play.
Hall said these were structural barriers that prevented many black and Latino students from enrolling.
"No kid should have to go talk to the counselor," he said.
Since the 1980s, thousands of black parents have sought better education options in St. Louis County. More than 30,000 city children have boarded buses for predominantly white schools as part of the voluntary desegregation program. And more recently, hundreds of parents in the Normandy and Riverview Gardens school districts have done the same under Missouri's school transfer law, even crossing into St. Charles County to enroll their children.
Test scores alone indicate that black students fare better academically in high-performing schools than in schools that are segregated by race and income. They're also more likely to graduate. It's why many black parents have bought homes in predominantly white districts so their children could be in high-performing classrooms.
But some African-American parents say their children's opportunity at those schools - particularly when it comes to elite courses - has been limited.
One mother said her black daughter with good grades at Parkway Central High was discouraged by a counselor from taking honors English. A father in Kirkwood said he wasn't informed that his accelerated middle school son could take more challenging math courses at Kirkwood High, even when he asked about more rigorous options.
"Why would you push others and give them opportunity, but not give it to him?" said Jeffrey Blair, the father.
BENEFITING ALL
Increasingly, educators in several suburban districts are questioning structures and practices they suspect may be stifling the potential of many black children. That includes cultural sensitivity training for teachers to better connect with minority students.
A study released in March by Johns Hopkins University found that white teachers expect significantly less academic success from black students than black teachers do. This is particularly the case when the students are boys.
"A teacher telling a student they're not smart will weigh heavily on how that student feels about their future and perhaps the effort they put into doing well in school," said Nicholas Papageorge, co-author of the study.
But other initiatives are underway. In Illinois, State Superintendent of Schools Tony Smith and Gov. Bruce Rauner announced their intention to help 100,000 minority and low-income students gain access to AP courses in the next three years.
In the fall, Clayton School District officials began examining achievement disparities among racial groups. Administrators have surveyed and met with black parents and students to hear about their experiences in the classroom.
In Parkway, a district initiative called Diversity in Action aims to correct the problem of failing to identify black students who are gifted, and to further diversify honors classes in all of its schools. The approach has found some success.
In Kirkwood, a 60-member task force of black and white educators, parents and district residents began working one year ago to eliminate racial divides. The group went beyond achievement differences and began examining messages children may be receiving about themselves through curriculum. They're looking at programs to see who is benefiting from them and who is not.
In the 2014-15 school year, black students made up 17 percent of Kirkwood High's enrollment but just 4 percent of AP enrollment.
"Are we keeping them away from opportunity?" asked Bryan Painter, an assistant superintendent in Kirkwood, during an interview in his office. "What are we telling kids about their own abilities?"
On Monday, the Kirkwood School Board accepted the 56-page report that resulted from the task force meetings. Included in the report is a goal that enrollment in AP and honors classes would reflect the diversity percentages of the school.
MAKING STRIDES
Back in August, Naomi Blair, a junior, walked into her AP Psychology class at Kirkwood High and immediately felt uncomfortable. She was the only African-American student in the room.
"I could practically hear their words, ‘What is she doing in this class?' " Naomi wrote in an essay that was published in YES! Magazine in December.
Her experience turned into an effort to make students like her feel more comfortable in Kirkwood's most advanced classes. The first step was persuading more to enroll.
So in March, with the encouragement of her AP Language and Composition teacher, Naomi stood with four other black honors students at the front of a second-floor classroom. More than 20 African-American underclassmen were there to hear what they had to say about honors and AP classes.
"How many of you have heard of honors or AP?" Naomi asked them. All but a few of the hands went up. "How many have signed up for one of these classes for next year?" Most of the hands stayed down.
One by one, Naomi and the honors students shared the amount of studying and time involved in AP classes such as calculus, world history and language composition. Naomi hoped that hearing from peers would boost the confidence levels of the underclassmen, some of whom said they were wavering between general classes or more rigorous ones.
"We are not performing at the level we should be," Naomi told them. "That does not mean we do not have the ability to."
Romona Miller, an assistant principal, told the students the biggest barriers to these classes was often themselves.
"We feel like these are classes we don't belong in," said Miller, herself an African-American. "Why do we feel that way? No one has a sign that says, ‘Hey, you don't belong here. You can't come.' "
A more extensive outreach is taking place in Ladue.
It began in 2010, when social studies teacher Rob Good noticed that the number of African-American students in AP courses was on the decline at Ladue Horton Watkins High, despite the fact that the school had expanded its offerings.
Good believed the decline was due partly to students' worrying, "Am I really ready to take this?"
"It was an opportunity gap," he said. "They didn't see that the opportunity was for them."
The following school year, he and Eric Hahn, a history teacher, worked to address this by starting an after-school club for black students enrolled in AP classes. They began meeting in the library for two hours on Monday nights, after sports practices.
Teachers volunteered their time. The school provided dinner. The club is called STRIDE, for Students Taking Rigorous Instruction Developing Exceptionally. It is also open to Hispanic students and is an approach that has proven successful in other states.
One evening in March, about 30 sophomores and juniors filled tables in the school's cavernous library. They had questions for AP instructors - questions about the upcoming AP World History test, and recent quiz in AP European History. Hahn led a quick discussion about study skills.
Elijah Martin, a junior, said that without the program he wouldn't have signed up for AP classes.
"It's the experience of being around people like you," said Elijah, who hopes to become an astrophysicist. "Seeing what they can do, what you can do - that can empower you."
In the four years since the program was launched, the number of black and Hispanic students enrolled in Ladue's AP courses has increased by 159 percent. The average exam score rose one point, to a three, out of a potential five.
Simi Falako, who graduated this month, said she didn't know about AP or honors classes until teachers and students in STRIDE approached her as a sophomore. She hesitated to enroll, knowing she'd probably be the only black student in the room. But ultimately, she took nine AP classes.
This fall, she will attend Harvard University.
---
Black students here are less likely than whites to have access to Advanced Placement courses: 18 - Typical number of AP courses offered at high schools with majority white enrollment. 6½ - Typical number of AP courses offered at high schools with majority black enrollment
But even when they attend schools with more than 15 AP classes, there's still a gap: 16.8% - Pct. of all students at such schools who are black 6.4% - Pct. of students in AP classes at such schools who are black
Data are for 2014-15 at schools in St. Louis County, St. Louis city and St. Charles County.
---
HIGHER CLASSES
Advanced Placement classes are considered the gold-standard for in preparing students for college-level work. But in some high schools, students also can also choose from dual enrollment, International Baccalaureate and honors classes. What are the differences?
- Honors classes are a cut above general courses in terms of pace and rigor. They often prepare students for Advanced Placement.
- Advanced Placement is a program created by the College Board that offers college-level material and exams. If passed, the exams can yield college credit. AP class grades may be weighted, which gives students even more advantage on college applications. More than 36 courses are available for schools to administer.
- Dual enrollment courses allow high school students to earn high school and college credit while taking one course - often through a partnership with a nearby college or university. Many schools that don't offer AP have dual enrollment, such as Jennings High School and Lift For Life Academy. Many schools offer both. 
- International Baccalaureate is program used worldwide in which courses usually involve more research, writing, and hands-on evaluation. Some schools, such as Brentwood High, offer IB as an alternative to AP. Metro Academic and Classical High School is one that offers both.
***
THE AP GAP At high schools around the St. Louis area, black students usually make up a smaller percentage of students taking AP courses than their percentage of the total student body. Here are the percentages for the 2014-15 school year.
ST. LOUIS
High school … No. of AP courses … Black pct. of student body … Black pct. of AP students Carnahan School of the Future … 6 … 89.1% … 87.6% Central Visual/Performing Arts … 10 … 81.8% … 72.2% Cleveland NJROTC Academy … 6 … 74.1% … 63.6% Collegiate School of Med/Bio … 1 … 56.4% … 14.3% Gateway STEM … 12 … 59.6% … 43.5% McKinley Class. Leadership Acad. … 5 … 46.9% … 49.1% Metro … 5 … 45.4% … 37.0% Miller Career Academy … 6 … 95.6% … 97.5% Northwest Transportation and Law … 2 … 98.1% … 100.0% Roosevelt … 1 … 72.3% … 84.2% Soldan International Studies … 11 … 86.5% … 87.3% Sumner … 6 … 98.4% … 100.0% Vashon … 1 … 99.5% … 100.0%
ST. LOUIS COUNTY
High school … No. of AP courses … Black pct. of student body … Black pct. of AP students Affton … 10 … 7.9% … 3.4% Bayless … 2 … 15.2% … 4.3% Brentwood … 0 … 26.4% … - Clayton … 23 … 20.9% … 3.8% Eureka … 24 … 7.9% … 2.6% Hancock … 5 … 19.1% … 10.3% Hazelwood Central … 9 … 88.6% … 95.3% Hazelwood East … 7 … 97.5% … 96.1% Hazelwood West … 10 … 48.2% … 30.3% Jennings … 0 … 98.7% … - Kirkwood … 19 … 17.3% … 4.2% Ladue Horton Watkins … 23 … 22.0% … 10.0% Lafayette … 27 … 11.4% … 2.6% Lindbergh … 20 … 4.8% … 1.9% Maplewood-Richmond Heights … 5 … 34.2% … 22.5% Marquette … 24 … 11.0% … 4.1% McCluer … 20 … 85.9% … 79.4% McCluer North … 15 … 74.3% … 69.3% McCluer South-Berkeley … 7 … 94.4% … 88.5% Mehlville … 12 … 10.5% … 2.4% Normandy … 0 … 96.5% … - Oakville … 18 … 8.1% … 2.7% Parkway Central … 15 … 16.7% … 2.0% Parkway North … 17 … 29.2% … 9.7% Parkway South … 14 … 10.8% … 3.1% Parkway West … 18 … 11.2% … 3.1% Pattonville … 15 … 32.9% … 17.6% Ritenour … 9 … 42.8% … 27.6% Riverview Gardens … 8 … 97.9% … 96.1% Rockwood Summit … 22 … 8.3% … 2.9% University City … 12 … 89.0% … 55.7% Valley Park … 6 … 25.0% … 6.2% Webster Groves … 15 … 23.3% … 15.5%
ST. CHARLES COUNTY
High school … No. of AP courses … Black pct. of student body … Black pct. of AP students Emil E. Holt … 21 … 9.6% … 4.3% Francis Howell Central … 22 … 7.9% … 3.3% Francis Howell … 22 … 5.5% … 2.2% Francis Howell North … 23 … 9.5% … 4.4% Ft. Zumwalt East … 15 … 7.6% … 5.0% Ft. Zumwalt North … 23 … 6.5% … 2.2% Ft. Zumwalt South … 22 … 6.1% … 2.4% Ft. Zumwalt West … 27 … 5.8% … 4.3% Liberty … 2 … 4.8% … 0.0% St. Charles* … 16 … 26.0% … 5.6% Timberland … 24 … 6.9% … 3.3%
MADISON COUNTY
High school … No. of AP courses … Black pct. of student body … Black pct. of AP students Alton … 11 … 26.3% … 9.6% Civic Memorial … 0 … 1.0% … - Collinsville … 12 … 10.6% … 3.2% Edwardsville … 13 … 8.0% … 2.0% Granite City … 3 … 14.0% … 6.5% Highland … 10 … 0.3% … 0.0% Roxana … 2 … 1.0% … 0.0% Triad … 9 … 2.0% … 0.0%
ST. CLAIR COUNTY
High school … No. of AP courses … Black pct. of student body … Black pct. of AP students Belleville East … 5 … 39.6% … 12.8% Belleville West … 10 … 33.0% … 11.0% Cahokia … 6 … 89.0% … 100.0% East St. Louis … 8 … 98.0% … 100.0% Freeburg … 4 … 1.0% … 0.0% Mascoutah … 7 … 11.5% … 5.4% New Athens … 1 … 1.0% … 0.0% O'Fallon … 0 … 19.6% … -
* Figures from the two high schools in the St. Charles R-VI district were provided as aggregate district figures. In this analysis, they are treated as one school.
SOURCES: Missouri Department of Elementary and Secondary Education; Illinois State Board of Education; area school districts

Graphic

 
 Social worker Maxine Birdsong leads a birthday song for Janelle Brown, who recently turned 15 and got her driving permit, as members of STRIDE (Students Taking Rigorous Instruction Developing Exceptionally) eat dinner at Ladue Horton Watkins High School on Monday, March 21, 2016. Instructors in the program work with African-American and Hispanic students who are preparing for Advanced Placement exams. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  Mekesa Smith, 15, celebrates with social studies teacher Rob Good as she is chosen the winner of a reading exercise in understanding historical context at Ladue Horton Watkins High School on Monday, March 21, 2016. Mekesa is a member of STRIDE (Students Taking Rigorous Instruction Developing Exceptionally), whose teachers work with African-American and Hispanic students who are preparing for Advanced Placement exams. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  Social worker Maxine Birdsong (left) joins teachers Rob Good and Candice Spector as they judge the work of Dee Nichols, 16, during an exercise in understanding historical context of readings at a meeting of STRIDE (Students Taking Rigorous Instruction Developing Exceptionally) in Ladue Horton Watkins High School on Monday, March 21, 2016. Instructors in the program work with African-American and Hispanic students who are preparing for Advanced Placement exams. Nichols' classmate, Ope Falako, 16, watches at rear. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  Passing between portraits of Ivan C. Nicholas, the first superintendent of Ladue Schools and Abraham Lincoln, Shaun Carr, 16, heads home from the library of Ladue Horton Watkins High School following a meeting of STRIDE (Students Taking Rigorous Instruction Developing Exceptionally) on Monday, March 21, 2016. Instructors in the program work with African-American and Hispanic students who are preparing for Advanced Placement exams. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  Janelle Brown, 15, a sophomore at Ladue Horton Watkins High School, works through a reading exercise in understanding historical context during a meeting of STRIDE (Students Taking Rigorous Instruction Developing Exceptionally) at the school on Monday, March 21, 2016. Instructors in the program work with African-American and Hispanic students who are preparing for Advanced Placement exams. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  Kaycee Little, 15, a sophomore at Ladue Horton Watkins High School, works through a reading exercise to link historical context of world events during a meeting of STRIDE (Students Taking Rigorous Instruction Developing Exceptionally) at the school on Monday, March 21, 2016. Instructors in the program work with African-American and Hispanic students who are preparing for Advanced Placement exams. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  Social studies teacher Rob Good and social worker Maxine Birdsong look over the work of Arsema Esayas, a sophomore at Ladue Horton Watkins High School, during an exercise in understanding historical context of readings at a meeting of STRIDE (Students Taking Rigorous Instruction Developing Exceptionally) at the school on Monday, March 21, 2016. Instructors in the program work with African-American and Hispanic students who are preparing for Advanced Placement exams. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  Bersabeh Mesfin, (center) a junior at Parkway West High School, talks with classmate Jesse Calvert on Monday, May 16, 2016, as their class prepares for their History of St. Louis final exam. Mesfin is one of the few African-American students in honors biology, English, and French. Photo by Christian Gooden, cgooden@post-dispatch.com  Dr. Shonda Ambers-Phillips (C), Executive Director of Student Services for the Kirkwood School District participates in a discussion during the Kirkwood Achievement Gap Task Force meeting at the Kirkwood Administration Building on April 7, 2016 in Kirkwood, Missouri. The task force is 60 members, half black, half white that convened to tackle the achievement gap between black and white students that's vexed educators for decades. Photo by Michael Thomas  An overall of attendees during the Kirkwood Achievement Gap Task Force meeting at the Kirkwood Administration Building on April 7, 2016 in Kirkwood, Missouri. The task force is 60 members, half black, half white that convened to tackle the achievement gap between black and white students that's vexed educators for decades. Photo by Michael Thomas  Kirkwood Assistant Superintendent, Bryan Painter holds previous district achievement reports as he speaks during the Kirkwood Achievement Gap Task Force meeting at the Kirkwood Administration Building on April 7, 2016 in Kirkwood, Missouri. The task force is 60 members, half black, half white that convened to tackle the achievement gap between black and white students that's vexed educators for decades. Photo by Michael Thomas  Christy Newsham (L), a kindergarten teacher at Tillman Elementary school discusses data during the Kirkwood Achievement Gap Task Force meeting at the Kirkwood Administration Building on April 7, 2016 in Kirkwood, Missouri. The task force is 60 members, half black, half white that convened to tackle the achievement gap between black and white students that's vexed educators for decades. Photo by Michael Thomas  Kirkwood district resident, Carl Jones, discusses with other group members during the Kirkwood Achievement Gap Task Force meeting at the Kirkwood Administration Building on April 7, 2016 in Kirkwood, Missouri. The task force is 60 members, half black, half white that convened to tackle the achievement gap between black and white students that's vexed educators for decades. Photo by Michael Thomas  Dr. Shonda Ambers-Phillips (R), Executive Director of Student Services for the Kirkwood School District participates in a discussion during the Kirkwood Achievement Gap Task Force meeting at the Kirkwood Administration Building on April 7, 2016 in Kirkwood, Missouri. The task force is 60 members, half black, half white that convened to tackle the achievement gap between black and white students that's vexed educators for decades. Photo by Michael Thomas  Social worker Maxine Birdsong (left) joins teachers Rob Good and Candice Spector as they judge the work of Dee Nichols, 16, (photo on left) during an exercise in understanding historical context of readings at a meeting of STRIDE (Students Taking Rigorous Instruction Developing Exceptionally) in Ladue Horton Watkins High School on Monday, March 21, 2016. Nichols' classmate, Ope Falako, 16, watches at rear. In the photo on the right, Kaycee Little, 15, arranges phrases for her historical context work. Photos by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  Kirkwood High School students sign into a presentation being given at the school on the advantages of taking advance placement (AP) classes on Thursday March 31, 2016. The presentation's goal was to encourage more minority students to sign up for AP classes. Photo by David Carson, dcarson@post-dispatch.com  Kirkwood High School sophomore Sha'Diya Tomlin-Warren(center) listens to the advantages of taking advance placement (AP) classes during a presentation at the school designed to encourage more minority students to sign up for AP classes on Thursday March 31, 2016. Photo by David Carson, dcarson@post-dispatch.com  Kirkwood High School sophomore Tabitha Stowers(center) listens to the advantages of taking advance placement (AP) classes during a presentation at the school designed to encourage more minority students to sign up for AP classes on Thursday March 31, 2016. Photo by David Carson, dcarson@post-dispatch.com  Kirkwood High School juniors Naomi Blair (left) and Sarah Blair (right) talk about the advantages of taking advance placement (AP) classes during a presentation at the school designed to encourage more minority students to sign up for AP classes on Thursday March 31, 2016. The girls, who are are juniors, have been taking AP classes at Kirkwood and want more minority students to take part. Photo by David Carson, dcarson@post-dispatch.com  Kirkwood High School students listen to a presentation being given at the school on the advantages of taking advance placement (AP) classes on Thursday March 31, 2016. The presentation's goal was to encourage more minority students to sign up for AP classes. Photo by David Carson, dcarson@post-dispatch.com  Kirkwood High School students sign into a presentation being given at the school on the advantages of taking advance placement (AP) classes on Thursday March 31, 2016. The presentation's goal was to encourage more minority students to sign up for AP classes. Photo by David Carson, dcarson@post-dispatch.com 

Load-Date: May 22, 2016


End of Document


Common Core stirs fear and distrust National standards, meant to boost achievement, instead fuel worries about federal influence.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 12, 2013 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1660 words
Byline:  By Elisa Crouch  , ecrouch@post-dispatch.com,  > 314-340-8119 
Body


James Shuls of the conservative Show-Me Institute considers himself an outspoken critic of the Common Core, a set of national standards that define what English and math skills public school children should learn at each grade level.
But even Shuls was surprised at how quickly a public meeting on the subject got out of hand this month, when parents began shouting at Missouri education department official inside a Lindbergh School District meeting room.
They accused the official of lying. Of wanting to collect private information about their children. Of trying to control students' thoughts.
"Some of it is misinformation," Shuls said later. "Some of it is real legitimate concerns parents have."
The growing backlash to the Common Core, to be fully in effect in Missouri and Illinois in the 2014-15 school year, has less to do with the skills the standards promote than the motivations many parents fear are behind them.
They were developed in 2009 after the National Governors Association began pushing for a common and more challenging set of English and math standards for the nation's schools. The effort involved hundreds of educators. It received bipartisan support from the nation's governors. Backers include Republican Jeb Bush, former governor of Florida, and Democratic Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon.
Once educators developed the standards, the Obama administration endorsed them. The U.S. Department of Education made adoption of the Common Core one of two options for states to receive a waiver from the No Child Left Behind law.
Some now point to that moment as the one that turned the debate over the Common Core away from what skills children should be learning. Now, much of the opposition is fueled by contempt for any federal role in public education and, more specifically, for the policies of the Obama administration.
"That has certainly heightened it," said Anne Gassel, who has been writing critically about Common Core on the blog, Missouri Education Watchdog.
"A lot of where this started is the mistrust with this administration," said Jane Cunningham, a Republican from Chesterfield who served in the Missouri Legislature and is neutral on Common Core. "If he had not embraced it, it would not be the problem it is."
BACKLASH
The Common Core standards are designed to better prepare children for college and careers, promoters say, and to reduce the likelihood students will waste time and money on post-secondary remedial courses.
More specifically, the standards require students to be exposed to more nonfiction at all grade levels than in the past, and to have a deeper understanding of math. Some math skills, for example, would be taught one year earlier.
The Common Core is not a federal program, state officials say.
On repeated occasions, Missouri Education Commissioner Chris Nicastro has said local control of schools will remain once the standards go into effect. Teachers, Nicastro says, will still determine how best to help their students meet the expectations. School districts, she says, will continue to choose curriculum.
But parents who hold the belief the federal government will control textbook selection and lesson plans have asked if they could opt out of Common Core, which the Missouri and Illinois state boards approved in 2010. They're signing petitions requesting that the state board repeal the standards. Their fears and concerns are exacerbated by partisan newsletters and websites that link the Common Core to socialism.
Kris Beaton, who has children in Rockwood schools, said she learned about Common Core from a friend. Then she heard about it on the radio. She said her main concern is that the standards will eliminate local control of schools. "It's overwhelming," she said.
Like many parents who oppose the Common Core, Beaton's concerns have grown as she has attended meetings and heard and read things that scare her, including blogs that link to a single page in a 126-page U.S. Department of Education draft report titled "Promoting Grit, Tenacity and Perseverance: Critical Factors for Success in the 21st Century."
The passage describes four devices, including a pressure-sensitive computer mouse and a facial expression camera that can monitor students' engagement during online tutoring.
The reference in the report is from an academic paper unrelated to Common Core. It does not reflect or recommend department policy, said Daren Briscoe, spokesman for the U.S. Department of Education. The draft goes on to state the devices are "intrusive or impractical for use in school settings."
But conservative bloggers have linked the two, and some parents worry that the Common Core means facial scanning devices are coming to classrooms.
"My biggest concern is, are you going to hook our kids to these things?" said Lisa Pannett, a parent with children in the Mehlville School District. "Because I'm not on board with that."
Such fears seem to have caught educators across the state off guard, leaving them almost slack-jawed when pressed about them at board meetings and forums.
At the meeting at Lindbergh, Pannett shouted questions from the back of the room about whether her children are about to become science experiments.
"Data mining!" one man yelled at Maureen Clancy-May, area supervisor at the Missouri education department, leading the meeting. "Why don't you talk about that?"
"No more data will be collected on students than there is now," Clancy-May said.
Since 1989, the state has collected student data for school accreditation and accountability purposes. The data includes student gender, ethnicity, attendance, special education placement and homeless status. The data is protected by federal privacy laws. The data categories can be found on the department's website.
ROLLING OUT
For educators, revisiting standards in public education is nothing new in Missouri - the state education department has done it several times since 1993 when the Outstanding Schools Act directed the State Board of Education to set academic standards for schools. But resistance typically comes from those questioning what grade level is best to teach kids certain skills - not from people accusing the state of thought monitoring and control.
"In the past, you had rooms full of educators with concerns," said Jim Simpson, superintendent of Lindbergh schools. "Now it's rooms full of people with strong political views."
The school district has been preparing teachers for the Common Core rollout for two years, he said. And none of it involves monitoring devices or curriculum from the feds, he said.
"The idea that we'd be putting electrodes on kids? That is so sci-fi," Simpson said.
The Francis Howell School District has already begun implementing the Common Core in kindergarten through the second grade, without any criticism from parents, said Mary Hendricks-Harris, Francis Howell's chief academic officer.
When the standards kick in for all grade levels in 2014, "We will be upping the expectation of the reading level anywhere from a year to a year and a half," she said.
The standards require that student delve deeper, but cover fewer, math objectives. In English, they will spend more time writing persuasively and critically than in the past.
"It's about a 30 percent departure from what we're already doing," said Art McCoy, superintendent of the Ferguson-Florissant School District.
McCoy isn't totally on board with the standards - he expects that student creativity, for one, will suffer with the shift to more "evidence-based" writing.
Shuls of the Show-Me Institute would prefer parents and schools to set their own standards, rather than states.
"Ultimately, there's absolutely no evidence that content standards improve education," he said.
Earlier this year, Missouri Sen. John Lamping, R-Ladue, proposed a bill to repeal the Common Core.
His bill no longer includes the repeal and was approved by the Senate this week. Instead, it would require the state education department to hold hearings in each congressional district before full implementation of Common Core.
Prior to the meetings, the bill also would require the department to present a fiscal analysis of implementation, as well as any additional data that would be collected on students.
In 2015, the state education department plans to administer new standardized tests to see whether students are meeting expectations set by the Common Core. To do this, however, it will need money from the Legislature.
---
A LOOK AT THE COMMON CORE
The Common Core Standards include detailed lists of what concepts ought to be taught when to students in grades K-12.
Missouri, like most states, is now reworking its standards to conform.
In some cases the Common Core is more rigorous than the former state standards. Example: Missouri required third-graders students to "tell time to the nearest five minutes." The Common Core requires them to: "Tell and write time to the nearest minute and measure time intervals in minutes. Solve word problems involving addition and subtraction of time intervals in minutes, e.g., by representing the problem on a number line diagram."
In other cases, the Common Core seeks earlier skill mastery. Example: Common Core asks fourth-graders to determine the theme of a story, drama, or poem from details in the text, and to summarize the text. The Missouri standards expected that of seventh-graders, focusing more generally on having fourth-graders "identify and explain the relationship between the main idea and supporting details."
In many cases, the Common Core and Missouri standards were largely in agreement. Example: Common Core for writing in grades 11 and 12 says students should: "Establish and maintain a formal style and objective tone while attending to the norms and conventions of the discipline in which they are writing." Missouri's standards said: "Compose a variety of texts using narrative, descriptive, expository, and/or persuasive features."
Source: Missouri Department of Elementary and Secondary Education

Notes

 COMMON CORE   


Graphic

 
 THURSDAY, MAY 2, 2013 - Lisa Pannett, a Mehlville schools parent, shouts "are you going to do this to our kids!" as she holds up a page from a report by the U. S. Department of Education during a forum about Common Core Standards that may be implemented in many schools across the nation. The discussion was held at the Lindbergh School District, 4900 S. Lindbergh Blvd. The report can be found at http://www.ed.gov/edblogs/technology/files/2013/02/OET-Draft-Grit-Report-2-17-13.pdf  Photo by Jerry Naunheim Jr. 

Load-Date: August 15, 2013


End of Document


Creve Coeur-based Benson Hill reels in $150 million in ag-tech company's latest round of funding
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 30, 2020 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 386 words
Byline:  BY BRYCE GRAY  St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


Benson Hill, the rising "food tech" company based in Creve Coeur, wrapped up a recent funding round by attracting $150 million from prominent investors.
The haul is more than Benson Hill has raised in its eight-year history. It's also among the top rounds ever raised in St. Louis' growing biotechnology industry. The company said its total funding of $283 million trails only Galera Therapeutics, a drug startup, among biotech firms founded in the region.
Benson Hill combines biotechnology and data science to enhance the nutritional qualities and sustainability of crops. While much of its work centers on commodities like soybeans, the company has also helped Mars protect its chocolate supply by developing cacao trees that are more resilient to threats from climate change and disease.
Benson Hill's leaders say the new money will help fuel product development, and "talent build-out." The company currently employs about 190 people, most of whom work at its newly opened Creve Coeur headquarters. It built the new facility to accommodate growth, and is currently hiring for about 20 new positions.
The money will also help ensure that the company can meet growing customer demand.
"That is a key emphasis for us at this stage of our growth," said Matt Crisp, Benson Hill's president and chief executive.
The company's work on new, high-protein soy products drove investor interest, Crisp said, as it's linked with the fast-growing "alternative, plant-based protein category."
Crisp said the latest round of funding attracted influential partners from three continents: North America, Europe and Asia. Investors include GV, formerly known as Google Ventures, and agribusiness giant Louis Dreyfus Co.
Crisp sees their investment as "an acknowledgment that the farmer and the consumer really deserve to be linked in a way that our current food system has not allowed them to be."
Looking forward, the company intends to maintain a special emphasis on proteins and vegetables, Crisp said. Many vegetable types, he noted, have not seen as much genetic research and modification as staple commodity row crops, like corn, that form the base of modern food regimes. That makes them an appealing frontier for Benson Hill.
"It's a category of crops that have gotten pathetically little innovation dollars, historically," said Crisp.

Load-Date: October 30, 2020


End of Document


People in Business: Deli Star names new R&D director
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 21, 2020 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 387 words
Body


Former Panera executive joins Deli Star team
Former Panera Bread executive Michelle Claravall was hired as director of research and development for Deli Star Corp.
Claravall will lead operational aspects of the firm's Culinary Innovation Team, working alongside chefs, culinologists and food scientists. She will split her time between the company's St. Louis Innovation Center and its Fayetteville, Illinois, plant until the opening of Deli Star's Food Discovery Center in City Foundry St. Louis in early 2021.
Claravall brings more than 20 years of food industry experience in product development, culinary collaboration, team-member development and supplier management. Most recently, she was with Panera as its new-product introductions director, operation services.
At Deli Star, a protein ingredient supplier to the sandwich, salad and prepared meal-making industries, Claravall will touch upon all aspects of the company, creating and implementing sourcing strategies, identifying opportunities for menu development and health and wellness initiatives, and lending support to sales and marketing efforts.
---
Kathleen W. Bilderback of Affinity Law Group was named president-elect for the Society of Financial Service Professionals.
Todd Lesher joined Payne Family Homes as vice president of sales and marketing.
Scott Wiese was named office manager at Stinson LLP.
Deana Woldanski joined Impact Technologies as solution consultant.
Douglas Stockton was named growth and development director for Northwestern Mutual and its Chesterfield office.
Cameron Poole was appointed director of equity and inclusion for the Clayton School District.
MTM hired Matt Geitner as director of public affairs and Jill Hericks as director of strategic accounts.
Valley Insurance Agency Alliance named Susan Piccione as its regional manager for Missouri.
Alton Turner joined Kwame Building Group Inc. as a project engineer.
UHY LLP hired Nick Chambers as director of the Private Equity Services Group.
Philip R.O. Payne, director of the Institute for Informatics at Washington University School of Medicine, was named associate dean for health information and data science, and chief data scientist for the School of Medicine.
Roy Rosas, operating executive of Golden Gate Capital, was elected to the board of the Today and Tomorrow Educational Foundation.

Graphic

 
 Claravall  Bilderback   Lesher   Woldanski   Stockton   Poole   Geitner   Hericks   Piccione   Turner   Chambers   Payne  Rosas 

Load-Date: August 21, 2020


End of Document


People in Business
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 21, 2020 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 202 words
Body


Kathleen W. Bilderback of Affinity Law Group was named president-elect for the Society of Financial Service Professionals.
Todd Lesher joined Payne Family Homes as vice president of sales and marketing.
Scott Wiese was named office manager at Stinson LLP.
Deana Woldanski joined Impact Technologies as solution consultant.
Douglas Stockton was named growth and development director for Northwestern Mutual and its Chesterfield office.
Cameron Poole was appointed director of equity and inclusion for the Clayton School District.
MTM hired Matt Geitner as director of public affairs and Jill Hericks as director of strategic accounts.
Valley Insurance Agency Alliance named Susan Piccione as its regional manager for Missouri.
Alton Turner joined Kwame Building Group Inc. as a project engineer.
UHY LLP hired Nick Chambers as director of the Private Equity Services Group.
Philip R.O. Payne, director of the Institute for Informatics at Washington University School of Medicine, was named associate dean for health information and data science, and chief data scientist for the School of Medicine.
Roy Rosas, operating executive of Golden Gate Capital, was elected to the board of the Today and Tomorrow Educational Foundation.

Graphic

 
 Kathleen W. Bilderback of Affinity Law Group was named president-elect for the Society of Financial Service Professionals.  Todd Lesher joined Payne Family Homes as vice president of sales and marketing.   Deana Woldanski joined Impact Technologies team as solution consultant.  Douglas Stockton was named the growth and development director for Northwestern Mutual and its Chesterfield office.  Cameron Poole was appointed director of equity and inclusion for the Clayton School District.  MTM hired Matt Geitner as director of public affairs and Jill Hericks as director of strategic accounts.  MTM hired Matt Geitner as director of public affairs and Jill Hericks as director of strategic accounts.  Valley Insurance Agency Alliance named Susan Piccione as its regional manager for Missouri.  Alton Turner joined Kwame Building Group Inc. as a project engineer.   UHY LLP added Nick Chambers as director of the Private Equity Services Group.  Philip R.O. Payne, director of the Institute for Informatics at Washington University School of Medicine, was named associate dean for health information and data science, and chief data scientist for the School of Medicine.  Roy Rosas, operating executive of Golden Gate Capital, was added to the board of the Today and Tomorrow Educational Foundation. 

Load-Date: August 21, 2020


End of Document


Cable trouble dogs spacewalking astronauts
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 28, 2021 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2021 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A13
Length: 331 words
Byline:  By MARCIA DUNN Associated Press 
Body


CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. - Spacewalking astronauts encountered cable trouble Wednesday while attempting to make improvements to the International Space Station's European lab.
Only one of the two lab upgrades was completely successful.
NASA's Mike Hopkins and Victor Glover installed a new antenna on Columbus, one of three high-tech labs at the orbiting outpost. It took a few tries by scientists in Europe to get it turned on properly. No longer needed, the boxy antenna cover was thrown overboard.
"Here we go. Countdown: 3-2-1," Glover radioed as he heaved it safely away from the space station.
Elsewhere on the lab, Glover could not hook up all the power and data cables on a science research platform that's been awaiting activation for almost a year. He managed to hook up four of six cables. They checked out well with power flowing, enabling partial use of the platform.
But connectors on two cables would not close all the way, and those had to be capped. Engineers will try to come up with a work-around for a future spacewalk, so the entire platform can house experiments.
SpaceX delivered the platform named Bartolomeo to the space station last spring. The shelf was installed with the station's robot arm, but had to wait until Wednesday's spacewalk to get hooked up.
Airbus, which built and runs Bartolomeo, is looking to sell space on the platform for private research projects. It's Europe's first commercial venture outside the station.
Danish astronaut Andreas Morgensen guided the spacewalkers from Mission Control in Houston, where controllers wore masks and were seated apart because of the pandemic. The spacewalk lasted seven hours.
Hopkins and Glover will perform a second spacewalk on Monday to complete battery upgrades to the station's solar power grid. The latest spacewalk was the third for Hopkins and first for Glover.
They are part of SpaceX's second astronaut flight that launched in November. Their docked Dragon capsule was visible on NASA TV during the spacewalk.

Graphic

 
 NASA astronaut Mike Hopkins works Wednesday outside the International Space Station's European lab. Hopkins and another astronaut took a spacewalk in an effort to install a high-speed data link and connect cables for an experiment platform.  

Load-Date: January 28, 2021


End of Document


People in Business: Bull named to lead product development at Benson Hill
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 26, 2020 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 342 words
Body


Industry veteran Jason Bull was named chief technology officer for Benson Hill, a crop innovation company.
Bull will oversee all platform and product development. He will lead the company's combined R&D and data science capabilities across predictive breeding, genomics, product discovery, big data engineering and software development, and will be responsible for technology strategy and execution of the product pipeline.
Previously, Bull served as vice president of strategy and machine learning at Object Computing Inc. Before that, he worked with Bayer and Climate Corp.
Bull has been granted 30 patents in digital agriculture, molecular breeding and robotic seed chipping and has authored 15 publications on the optimization of breeding and production systems. He earned his Ph.D. in quantitative genetics and biometrics and a bachelor's degree in quantitative genetics and analytics from the University of Queensland in Australia.
---
Ellie Rankeillor joined Evolution St. Louis as technical design manager.
KAI Enterprises hired Aaron Keistler as director of architecture.
Psychological Associates promoted Paula Godar to director of client operations.
The St. Louis chapter of International Facility Management Association announced the following newly elected officers on its board of directors:
- President, Scott Held, Ameren Corp.
- Immediate past president, Jeff Touchette, Jarrell Mechanical Contractors
- Vice president, David J. Gardin, Kindred Healthcare Inc.
- Treasurer, Michael Wright, Ameren Corp.
- Secretary, Gary Wood, Stryker Construction
Murphy Co. hired Mary Young as accounts payable/payroll clerk, Mackenzie King as data center services coordinator, Madison Feldhaus as service billing specialist, and Carolanne Dukeman as office clerk.
Latosha Fowlkes was named executive director of the St. Vincent Home for Children.
Adam Brandvein joined eXp Realty.
Bank of Belleville hired Paul Abert as market president for Madison County.
J.P. Morgan named Brandon Moritz as market team leader of its Private Banking business across Missouri and Kansas.

Notes

   People in business 


Graphic

 
 Jason Bull  Ellie Rankeillor  Aaron Keistler  Paula Godar  Mary Young  Mackenzie King  Madison Feldhaus  Carolanne Dukeman  Latosha Fowlkes  Adam Brandvein 

Load-Date: June 26, 2020


End of Document


Officials to probe data meddling Trump aides allegedly pressured CDC to alter weekly disease reports
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 15, 2020 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 415 words
Byline:  ASSOCIATED PRESS 
Body


WASHINGTON - A House subcommittee examining President Donald Trump's response to the coronavirus pandemic launched an investigation Monday into reports that political appointees meddled with routine government scientific data to better align with Trump's public statements.
The Democrat-led subcommittee said Monday that it requested transcribed interviews with seven officials from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Department of Health and Human Services, including communications aide Michael Caputo. Caputo has often publicly pushed back on CDC statements about the coronavirus and said falsely in a Facebook video on Sunday that the CDC has a "resistance unit" to undermine Trump, according to The New York Times. His page has since been made private.
According to a report in Politico, Caputo, along with scientific adviser Paul Alexander, pressured officials to alter the CDC's Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Reports, a long-running weekly journal that features the latest science-based research and data on infectious diseases. Known as MMWR, the report has long been a sacred government information resource for doctors, scientists and researchers tracking outbreaks.
The officials pressured CDC to change the reports, at times retroactively, to better align them with Trump's often rosier public statements about the coronavirus, Politico reported.
In a letter to Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar and CDC Director Robert Redfield, the Democratic members of the subcommittee said they are "gravely concerned" about the reports of political meddling in a journal that has long been free of political interference.
"With nearly 200,000 Americans killed and hundreds more dying each day from the coronavirus pandemic, the public needs and deserves truthful scientific information so they can keep themselves and their families healthy," the Democrats wrote.
Meanwhile, a drug company said Monday that adding an anti-inflammatory medicine to a drug already widely used for hospitalized COVID-19 patients shortens their time to recovery by an additional day.
Eli Lilly announced the results from a 1,000-person study sponsored by the U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. The result have not yet been published or reviewed by independent scientists, but the government confirmed that Lilly's statement was accurate.
The study tested baricitinib, a pill that Indianapolis-based Lilly already sells as Olumiant to treat rheumatoid arthritis.

Graphic

 
 Relatives and parents watch students entering the San Policarpo parish Monday as Italian schools reopen in Rome. Millions of children returned to school for the first time since early March, when the country became the epicenter of the outbreak in Europe and schools shut down. Photo by ALESSANDRA TARANTINO, ASSOCIATED PRESS  

Load-Date: September 16, 2020


End of Document


To reach climate goal, Monsanto needs help from customers
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 24, 2016 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. E1
Length: 1203 words
Byline:  By Jacob Barker St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


It's obvious where David Moose's property line ends and the neighboring farm field begins.
Moose's field has a light brown hue, coated by the dead cereal rye and corn cobs that remain from the cover crop he planted in October. Across his property line, the traditionally tilled earth is a darker brown, uncolored by cover crops.
"Cover crops, they've been kind of the buzzword for the last five to six years," said Moose, who farms corn and soybeans on about 1,500 acres south of Springfield, Ill.
Moose, whose family has been farming for generations, stopped using traditional tilling methods when he began taking over a larger role in farm operations from his father 32 years ago.
In the last several years, he's added cover crops to further stabilize the soil, help build up even more organic matter and control weeds. Now, he's trying to reduce the amount of fertilizer he uses by applying it in the spring rather than the fall so that the new crop can better absorb it.
It's these types of practices agricultural products giant Monsanto is trying to refine and promote among farmers, because if it wants to live up to its pledge to go carbon neutral by 2021, it will need a lot of help from its customers.
The Creve Coeur-based company can only do so much in house to reduce its own greenhouse gas emissions. It will apply best farming practices to its own seed production. But that only accounts for about one-sixth of its carbon emissions.
The majority of Monsanto's emissions, about two-thirds, come from the production of its signature Roundup herbicide, said Michael Lohuis, who heads Monsanto's agricultural environmental strategy. Those factory emissions will be difficult to reduce completely, so the company is looking for carbon offsets from farmers.
But all these practices and their associated environmental benefits and global warming offsets have to be studied and quantified to prove their worth.
More than that, they have to make business sense for farmers. In order to get farmers to reduce their carbon footprint (agriculture makes up about 9 percent of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions, and about 24 percent of global emissions), Monsanto will have to figure out both sides of that equation.
"None of this happens unless farmers buy into this," Lohuis said. "It needs to make sense for them practically and economically."
Luckily, there do seem to be economic benefits to farmers in some instances. Tillage, for instance, decreases soil carbon sequestration and requires more trips across the rows with farm equipment. Using less tillage can help build up carbon in soils.
But cutting carbon isn't why Moose adopted no-till. While traditional tillage helps fields dry out faster, making it easier for farmers to plant earlier in the year after heavy rains, it also makes the soil more prone to erosion, and Moose wanted to keep wind and rain from carrying off any more of his family's soil.
"Mother Nature only gave us so much soil to work with," he said. "Everything we lose with wind or water erosion, we're likely not going to get back."
He admits it took some time before he started seeing noticeable benefits, and no-till does tend to require more management and patience. But he wants his son to eventually take over the operation, and he was willing to wait for his investment in the soil to pay off.
"It took about five years for the soil to come around," Moose said. "The soil gets hard initially, but once the earthworms and bacteria and fungi get stabilized, they tend to loosen the soil up."
Even more than tillage, fertilizer applications account for a large share of cropland greenhouse gas emissions, which mostly come in the form of nitrous oxide emissions.
The nitrogen content of fertilizer adds to what is eventually released back as nitrous oxide, a gas with about 300 times more warming potential than carbon dioxide. Some 80 percent of U.S. nitrous oxide emissions come from agricultural soil management, which makes up about 4 percent of total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions.
There, Monsanto hopes its growing data science and precision agriculture arm can help refine fertilizer application to reduce the total amount. In some instances, cover crops can also help capture nitrogen and keep it in the soil for plant use longer term.
Both practices also hold the potential to benefit Monsanto. More farmers could use its precision agriculture and farming data services to reduce nitrogen inputs, and no-till farming tends to require more herbicides such as Roundup.
Nicholas Goeser, director of the Soil Health Partnership, points to benefits for farmers, too, including better yields over time, better drought resilience and less nutrient runoff. The organization receives part of its funding from the National Corn Growers Association and Monsanto, but also works with environmental groups such as the Environmental Defense Fund and the Nature Conservancy.
The Soil Health Partnership is working to quantify and study the effects of some of the techniques. It partners with farmers like Moose to gather data and publish research.
"These other tangential benefits can really help crop productivity outside of the climate side," Goeser said.
The prospect of carbon regulations could even be an opportunity for farmers who can sequester it, Goeser said.
"Farmers are very interested in it and they're very aware of mounting environmental pressures," he said. "But there are also opportunities that exist in carbon sequestration and carbon markets to gain additional value from their land."
But some of the changes require a culture shift and are harder to adopt on larger operations, said Lee Curby, who farms near Moose and was trying to learn some of his fertilizer reduction techniques.
Applying nitrogen fertilizer in the fall, when farmers are not busy with the spring planting season, is easier than applying it in the spring as Moose has done, Curby said.
"If you get to be much bigger than we are, it comes back to the management aspect," he said.
Many farmers work on one year or multiyear leases and aren't willing to wait for the investment in soil to pay off. Moose doesn't see many other farmers making the switch until they're required to by regulations - either on nutrient runoff in water or agriculture carbon limits. He feels his farm will be ready, whenever they do.
"I will easily be in compliance," he said.
Monsanto's Lohuis says climate change will ultimately hurt its customers through drought and unpredictable weather, which means they will buy less of its seeds and herbicides. But it, too, has its eyes on the prospect of future regulation.
"If we do the right thing and we lead and produce the right solution, it takes away the need for regulation," Lohuis said.
---
CARBON CONCERNS
Conventional tillage • The disturbed earth dries faster, allowing for planting earlier in the season, but it allows more greenhouse gases and water to escape.
No-till farming • Farmers do not disturb the soil except when planting. Plant residue left covering the soil helps capture gases and reduces evaporation and soil erosion.
Fertilizer • Monsanto's biggest concern is the greenhouse gases generated by fertilizer. Leveraging precision planting and data science will cut the amount of fertilizer used.

Graphic

 
 Working beside a neighbor's traditionally tilled farmland, David Moose plants corn on his no-till farm in Auburn, Il. on Tuesday, April 19, 2016. Moose's land has not been tilled in the 32 years he has owned it. He plans cereal rye cover crops to preserve soil nutrients and uses terraced land to control water runoff. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  Farmer Lee Curby fills a planter with hybrid corn seed at David Moose's no-till farm in Auburn, Il. on Tuesday, April 19, 2016. Moose's land has not been tilled in the 32 years he has owned it. He plans cereal rye cover crops to preserve soil nutrients and uses terraced land to control water runoff. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  Cereal rye mixes with old corn cobs and stalks on David Moose's no-till farm in Auburn, Il., photographed on Tuesday, April 19, 2016. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  The latest in technology allows farmer David Moose to make a call as his tractor steers itself while planting corn on his no-till farm in Auburn, Il. on Tuesday, April 19, 2016. Moose's land has not been tilled in the 32 years he has owned it. He plans cereal rye cover crops to preserve soil nutrients and uses terraced land to control water runoff. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  Farmer David Moose plants corn on his no-till farm in Auburn, Il. on Tuesday, April 19, 2016. As the planter drops seed, chains move soil to cover the trench carved by the planter. Moose's land has not been tilled in the 32 years he has owned it. He plans cereal rye cover crops to preserve soil nutrients and uses terraced land to control water runoff. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  Farmer David Moose teaches his assistant Lee Curby about tractor technology as they plant corn on his no-till farm in Auburn, Il. on Tuesday, April 19, 2016. Moose's land has not been tilled in the 32 years he has owned it. He plans cereal rye cover crops to preserve soil nutrients and uses terraced land to control water runoff. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com  Farmer David Moose plants corn on his no-till farm in Auburn, Il. on Tuesday, April 19, 2016. Moose's land has not been tilled in the 32 years he has owned it. He plans cereal rye cover crops to preserve soil nutrients and uses terraced land to control water runoff. Photo by Robert Cohen, rcohen@post-dispatch.com 

Load-Date: April 24, 2016


End of Document


Science Center wants tech leader Willing to pay for president strong in education and science.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 8, 2011 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMUNITY; Pg. B1
Length: 540 words
Byline: BY MATTHEW HATHAWAY , mhathaway@post-dispatch.com,  314-340-8121
Dateline: 0 
Body


More than six months after St. Louis Science Center President Douglas King announced he was quitting to take a job at a Seattle museum, the national search for his replacement is inching forward with no firm deadline.
Science Center leaders say they're taking their time looking for a leader with a strong background in both science and education. They're especially interested in finding someone with bold ideas for how the institution can use technology to boost its visitors' experience and education programs.
"We want to be more than a bricks-and-mortar establishment on Oakland Avenue," said Ted Hellman, president of the commission that runs the center. "The new CEO has to be someone who understands the technology of today."
And while there is no rush to fill the job, this much is clear: the Science Center says it won't be stingy when it comes to the new leader's salary. It won't have much choice, as executive pay continues to grow at large museums.
For now, the Science Center is holding informal meetings with some candidates, and Hellman says he hopes to replace King by the fall.
"We have high ambitions, and we're going to be patient," he said.
Science Center leaders are still winnowing a list of job candidates provided by DHR International, an executive search firm based in Chicago. Candidates on the short list will be interviewed by a search committee comprised of a dozen people, including civic leaders and Science Center commissioners and trustees.
Ultimately, any hiring decision will be made by the center's commission, an eight-member board appointed by St. Louis Mayor Francis Slay and St. Louis County Executive Charlie Dooley.
Philip Needleman, a former Washington University pharmacology professor and chief scientist at Monsanto who took over as the center's interim president in January, has said he does not want to be considered for the permanent position.
In recent years, critics have harped on what they see as high executive pay at the Science Center and the four other area institutions that receive public money from the Zoo-Museum District. The Science Center received about $10 million in tax money from the district last year.
In 2009, the most recent year for which the Science Center filed financial data with the IRS, it paid King $423,004 in base pay and benefits.
Hellman wouldn't say how much the Center expects to pay its next president, but he said the salary would be competitive with the nation's leading science museums. He pointed out that King left the Science Center after Seattle's Museum of Flight offered him a substantial salary increase.
Nationally, executive pay at large museums continues to grow, even if the economy has made fundraising at those institutions more difficult, said Freda Mindlin, president and chief executive of Opportunity Resources, a New York executive-recruitment firm.
"Cultural institutions still need to offer a competitive salary, especially if they hope to get someone who is happily employed," Mindlin said.
A salary in the neighborhood of $500,000 isn't out of line, Mindlin said, when one considers the multiple hats that museum heads are expected to wear.
"This individual is going to be a manager, a fundraiser and a politician all rolled in one," she said.

Graphic

 
 Photo by Emily Rasinski • erasinski@post-dispatch.com - Josh Gross, 14, of Iowa holds the left side of the arch steady as his bother Lucas, 11, reaches to put block 10 in place as they build the arch in the Structures Gallery at the St. Louis Science Center Monday afternoon. The structures gallery was renovated in 2009.  Photo - King 

Load-Date: June 8, 2011


End of Document


Mizzou wins $12 million, 5-year contract to train NGA employees in St. Louis, Washington
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 1, 2016 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A7
Length: 298 words
Byline:  By Ashley Jost St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


ST. LOUIS - Several months after confirming the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency is staying in St. Louis, the agency announced a $12 million contract to the University of Missouri's Columbia campus to train NGA employees.
The five-year contract to Mizzou's engineering school - the largest contract in the College of Engineering's history - is aimed at data science and "key education and training needs identified by NGA."
Curt Davis, director of the engineering school's Center for Geospatial Intelligence, said the process of acquiring the contract started more than a year ago. The NGA anticipates 1,800 working students in St. Louis and Washington participating in the graduate certificate program. Davis expects them to span from early career and beyond.
"Our faculty are thrilled to be able to support NGA's effort to equip its workforce with the data science skills necessary for NGA to make sense out of the overwhelming volume of government, commercial, and open-source geospatial information they have to deal with on a day-to-day basis," Davis said in a statement.
NGA employees will be paid for their time in these classes, Davis said. Beginning courses will likely be self-paced and online, with more advanced classes taught in person. Professors from Mizzou will teach the classes in St. Louis, but the university has contracted for teachers in Washington. Davis said Mizzou professors will travel to D.C. as needed.
When students are done with the program, they will have a graduate certificate in data science and a master's degree from the University of Missouri.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers plans to break ground on the federal intelligence agency's $1.75 billion campus in mid-2017. St. Louis officials hope the campus will reshape the area northwest of downtown.

Graphic

 
 The future National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency site in St. Louis, as seen looking southeast towards the St. Louis skyline on Thursday, March 17, 2016. Jefferson Avenue can be seen on the right side of the photo. Photo by David Carson, dcarson@post-dispatch.com  An artist rendering of proposed site for National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency in north St. Louis (handout) 

Load-Date: September 2, 2016


End of Document


Pac-12 football season to kick off in November
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 25, 2020 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS; Pg. B3
Length: 484 words
Byline:  By RALPH D. RUSSO Associated Press  By RALPH D. RUSSO Associated Press  
Body


The Pac-12 set a Nov. 6 start date Thursday for a seven-game football season, following the Big Ten in overturning an August decision to postpone until spring because of concerns about playing through the pandemic.
With the conference having secured daily COVID-19 testing for its athletes and having been given the green light from some state and local health officials in California and Oregon, the Pac-12 university presidents voted unanimously to lift a Jan. 1 moratorium on athletic competition.
The Pac-12's men's and women's basketball seasons can start Nov. 25, in line with the NCAA's recently announced opening date. The football championship game is set for Dec. 18 - along with other cross-division games that weekend - putting the conference in play for College Football Playoff and New Year's Six Bowl selection.
A major college football season that six weeks ago seemed to be in peril, slowly crumbling away, is reforming and has a chance to be almost whole by November. The Big Ten reversed course last week, with kickoff scheduled for the weekend of Oct. 24.
The Mountain West presidents were meeting Thursday night to discuss a possible late October start to the football season and the Mid-American Conference, the first FBS league to postpone, is also reconsidering playing in the fall.
The Southeastern Conference begins play this weekend, joining the Big 12, Atlantic Coast Conference and three others that have been up and running for weeks.
The season is ongoing but it has been anything but normal. There have been 21 games postponed or canceled since Aug. 26 because of teams battling various levels of COVID-19-related issues.
This week, four games scheduled to be played Saturday have been called off, including Notre Dame at Wake Forest because of a virus outbreak among Fighting Irish players.
The turning point for the return of fall sports for the Pac-12 came this month when it entered an agreement with a diagnostic testing company that will give each school the capability to conduct daily antigen tests on their athletes.
Daily testing should also decrease the number of athletes who end up in quarantine after coming into what would be considered a high-risk contact with someone who has tested positive.
When the Pac-12 postponed on Aug. 11, its medical advisors had recommended daily testing for athletes to safely compete at most of the conference's schools because of high rates of community spread of the virus.
"From the beginning of this crisis, our focus has been on following the science, data and counsel of our public health and infectious disease experts," Pac-12 Commissioner Larry Scott said in a statement. "Our agreement with Quidel to provide daily rapid-results testing has been a game-changer in enabling us to move forward with confidence that we can create a safe environment for our student-athletes while giving them the opportunity to pursue their dreams."

Load-Date: September 26, 2020


End of Document


MARS ROVER HAS STOPPED SENDING DATA TO EARTH
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 23, 2004 Friday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 681 words
Byline: Andrew Bridges/ The Associated Press
Dateline: PASADENA, CALIF.
Body


NASA's Spirit rover has stopped transmitting data from Mars in an ominous turn that baffled engineers and sent them scrambling Thursday to figure out what brought the mission to a potentially calamitous halt.
NASA received its last significant data from the unmanned Spirit early Wednesday, its 19th day on the surface of Mars. Since then, the six-wheeled vehicle has sent either random, meaningless radio noise or simple beeps acknowledging it has received commands from Earth.
"We now know we have had a very serious anomaly on the vehicle," project manager Pete Theisinger said at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
Engineers struggled to diagnose what was wrong with the rover. Among the possible causes: a corruption of its software or computer memory.
If the software is awry, NASA can fix it from Earth by beaming patches across more than 100 million miles of space or by rebooting the rover's computer. But if the problem lies with the rover's hardware, the situation would be far more grave - perhaps beyond repair.
"Yes, something could break, something certainly could fail. That's a concern we have - that's quite a serious event," Theisinger said.
Spirit is one half of an $820 million mission. Its twin rover, Opportunity, is expected to land on Mars late Saturday. The two robot explorers are supposed to examine the Red Planet's dry rocks and soil for evidence that it was once wetter and more hospitable to life.
Until Wednesday, Spirit had functioned almost flawlessly, and NASA scientists and engineers had been jubilant.
Cushioned by its air bags, the rover made a bull's-eye landing on Mars, surviving what was by far the most dangerous part of the mission - the descent through the atmosphere at 12,000 mph. Then on Jan. 15, in another nail-biting moment for NASA, the rover safely rolled down a ramp onto Mars' ruddy soil without becoming snagged.
It has snapped thousands of pictures, including breathtaking panoramic views and microscopic images of the Martian soil. It also carried out preliminary work analyzing the minerals and elements that make up its surroundings.
Steven Squyres, of Cornell University, the mission's main scientist, cautioned that communications problems are common on spacecraft. "While it is cause for concern, it is not cause for alarm," he said.
NASA last heard from Spirit as it prepared to continue its work examining its first rock, just a few yards from where it landed.
Early Thursday, NASA initially heard nothing from Spirit that would indicate it was in "fault mode," a state that the rover enters by itself when it has experienced a problem. Later, NASA sent a command to Spirit as if it were in fault mode, anyway. Spirit acknowledged with a beep that it received the command, indicating an onboard problem. That puzzled engineers.
"It is precisely like trying to diagnose a patient with different symptoms that don't corroborate," said Firouz Naderi, manager of JPL's Mars exploration program.
The rover missed several scheduled opportunities to communicate, both directly with Earth and by way of two NASA satellites in orbit around Mars. As of midday Thursday, it had sent no engineering or science data for more than 24 hours. NASA scheduled two other attempts Thursday night to communicate with Spirit.
Preliminary indications suggested the rover's radio was working, and it continued to generate power from the sun with its solar panels. Spirit's internal clock also was running and had roused the rover several times on cue to communicate with NASA's Mars Global Surveyor and 2001 Mars Odyssey as they zipped overhead.
Engineers hoped to receive data on how the spacecraft is functioning by early today, when a window of communication with the rover opens, JPL director Charles Elachi said in a television interview broadcast by NASA.
"We can do a diagnostic and understand what happened, what are the corrective actions that need to be done and how do we bring it carefully and thoughtfully to its normal operation mode," Elachi said.
"There is nothing rushing us to do the fix immediately, other than people being anxious," he added.

Notes

PAGE 2/ Link to more on the Mars mission online at STLtoday.com/links.


Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo Headshot - (Pete) Theisinger, "A very serious anomaly on the vehicle"

Load-Date: January 23, 2004


End of Document


Joe's St. Louis: As Foodie Cities go, our fair metropolis is ‘Midwest hotspot'
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 7, 2019 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2019 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 636 words
Byline:  By Joe Holleman St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


DINING HAUL - Some serious shout-out for STL from the food-infatuated folks at Yelp.
A recent look at recommendations filed on their restaurant review site puts our metropolis at No. 2 for the "Top 10 Foodie Cities."
The blurb for our metro states that we are a "Midwest hotspot" that "holds a wealth of to-die-for eateries."
A company release said its "Data Science team" looked at ratings, reviews, cuisine diversity and percentage of food photos posted to their site.
(For the record, "foodie" and "to-die-for" seem to be used without irony or sarcasm; not sure on "Data Science team.")
"From the s'mores french toast at Half and Half (Clayton) and the gaucho steak at Olive + Oak (Webster Groves), the Gateway City's food scene has something to offer for every meal," our blurb in the article states.
Other STL dining spots highlighted as being the most recommended by Yelp users were Broadway Oyster Bar and Union Loafers Cafe in St. Louis and the multi-site Mission Taco.
The only city to top us was San Francisco. Rounding out the list, Nos. 3-10, were: Honolulu; Plano, Texas; San Diego; Las Vegas; Richmond, Va.; Pittsburgh; Baltimore; and Austin.
AULD GREEN DEAL - For the 50th time, downtown St. Louis will play host to the annual St. Patrick's Day Parade at noon on March 16.
Leading this march will be parade founder and St. Louis Irish Consul Joseph McGlynn Jr.; parade committee chair Vincent Via; Irish guest of honor Aidan Davitt, a senator in Ireland; and honorary parade marshal Kevin Short, CEO of Clayton Capital Partners.
The parade will step off at noon from 20th and Market streets; proceed east on Market to Broadway; and south on Broadway to where it will disband at Clark Street. (Motorists take note: Market will be closed at 7:30 a.m. from Compton to Broadway.)
The parade will feature more than 130 units and 5,000 marchers. In the past, with accommodating weather, more than 350,000 people have attended the parade, organizers said.
Starting at 9 a.m., some inflatable balloons will be filled on the east side of Aloe Plaza, near Union Station.
Also at 9 a.m., the 41st Annual Michelob Ultra St. Patrick's Day Parade Run will begin. Both a 5-mile and a 3-kilometer run will be featured.
This year's runs will bring back the "Best Costume Award" competition, which in the past gave the crowd numerous running potatoes and several St. Patricks chasing snakes.
For information, call 314-241-7287 or go to irishparade.org.
The traditional St. Patrick's Day Parade in Dogtown, presented by the Ancient Order of Hibernians, will be held on St. Patrick's feast day, March 17.
The stepping off begins at 11 a.m. at Tamm and Oakland avenues. The following outdoor festival runs from 1 to 6 p.m. For information, go to stlhibernians.com.
SPEAKING O' GREEN ... - St. Louis is ranked as one of the top 20 cities in the nation when it comes to the "Best Cities for St. Patrick's Day."
Personal finance website WalletHub puts our fair burg at No. 18 out of the 200 largest cities in the U.S., higher than any of our major-city neighbors - other than Chicago, which finished at the top of the entire list.
The analysis was broken down into four main categories.
Our best showing, No. 10, was in the area of traditions, where the criteria included: number of parades, parties and festivals; share of population with Irish ancestry; number of Irish pubs and restaurants; and access to bars, a category in which we finished No. 3 in the entire U.S.
We were No. 49 when it came to having pleasant weather on the holiday, and No. 102 in the cost area, which took into account hotel, bar and restaurant prices. Our worst showing was in the safety category, where we were ranked No. 176.
The 10 best cities: Chicago; Philadelphia; Madison, Wis.; Boston; Tampa; Naperville, Ill.; New York; Pittsburgh; Rockford, Ill.; and Dayton, Ohio.

Graphic

 
 Joseph B. McGlynn Jr., founder of the downtown St. Patrick's Day parade, basks in the success of the second-annual parade in 1971. At his left is John Lynch, Ireland's prime minister. The coup of attracting Lynch to the parade created a tradition of inviting Irish officials each year. Lynch pronounced the parade "very impressive. We have parades in Ireland, but not as long or as comprehensive as this." (Post-Dispatch) 

Load-Date: March 8, 2019


End of Document


People in Business
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 12, 2019 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2019 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. B2
Length: 166 words
Body


Sandra J. Tatoian joined Goldenberg Heller & Antognoli PC.
Kyle Grate was named vice president of operations at St. Joseph Hospital - Lake Saint Louis.
Ryan Gierer was promoted to senior project manager at Knoebel Construction.
Sam Welge was promoted to manager of automation and energy solutions at Murphy Co.
Abeles and Hoffman promoted Millie Tutlam to tax supervisor.
The Doe Run Co. promoted Michael Montgomery to senior counsel and director of regulatory affairs. Tammy Stankey was promoted to director of communications.
Steve DeMarco joined TopOPPS Inc. as president and chief revenue officer.
Cordell Practice Management Group promoted the following: Lauren Phillips to senior manager of data science and quality; Amanda Fowler to associate director of client services; and Sarah Ruttan to associate director of training and legal operations.
Greg Gelzinnis was selected as president of the Northwest Chamber of Commerce.
Investa Management named John Davis as director of finance and accounting.

Graphic

 
 Investa Management named John Davis as director of finance and accounting.  Kyle Grate was named vice president of operations at SSM Health St. Joseph Hospital – Lake Saint Louis.  Sam Welge was promoted to manager of automation and energy solutions at Murphy Co.  Cordell Practice Management Group promoted the following: Lauren Phillips to senior manager of data science and quality; Amanda Fowler to associate director of client services; and Sarah Ruttan to associate director of training and legal ops.   Cordell Practice Management Group promoted the following: Lauren Phillips to senior manager of data science and quality; Amanda Fowler to associate director of client services; and Sarah Ruttan to associate director of training and legal ops.   Ryan Gierer was promoted to senior project manager at Knoebel Construction.  Sandra J. Tatoian joined Goldenberg Heller & Antognoli PC.  Greg Gelzinnis was selected as president of the Northwest Chamber of Commerce.  Cordell Practice Management Group promoted the following: Lauren Phillips to senior manager of data science and quality; Amanda Fowler to associate director of client services; and Sarah Ruttan to associate director of training and legal ops.  

Load-Date: April 12, 2019


End of Document


Monsanto says no to big deals
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 7, 2016 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A12
Length: 436 words
Byline:  From Wire Reports  Bloomberg and Reuters contributed to this report. 
Body


After years of unsuccessfully pursuing Swiss pesticide-maker Syngenta, Monsanto Co. says it no longer sees "large-scale" mergers and acquisitions as a strategy.
Speaking Wednesday on the Creve Coeur-based company's second-quarter earnings call, Chief Executive Officer Hugh Grant said Monsanto would use licensing, partnerships and small acquisitions to reach its vision of a fully integrated solution for farms, which will encompass seed, crop protection, nutrition and digital, data-driven precision management products.
"There's an opportunity in bringing chemistry and biology together on that acre, and using data science as the glue that holds that together," he said. "We are better placed than our competitors to integrate those three pieces together."
Monsanto's move for Syngenta triggered a period of heightened merger and acquisition activity in the industry, where six large companies have long dominated. Syngenta agreed in February to be acquired by ChemChina for $43 billion, while Dow Chemical and DuPont struck a $130 billion megamerger last year.
Low crop prices and belt-tightening by farmers have put pressure on earnings, prompting companies to consider acquisitions. Monsanto, the world's largest seed company, continued to tout itself as the industry's "partner of choice."
After its bid for Syngenta failed, Monsanto approached Bayer AG and expressed interest in its crop science unit, including a potential acquisition worth more than $30 billion, Reuters reported in March.
U.S. farmers have been spending less on everything from fertilizers to seeds as grain prices hover near five-year lows and incomes have fallen to their lowest since 2002. This has forced Monsanto and DuPont Pioneer to offer the steepest discounts in at least six years.
"Monsanto every year has a lineup of new products that allows them to charge more than the prior year. This is an environment where that's a little tougher of a conversation to have," said Matt Arnold, materials analyst with Edward Jones.
Net income attributable to the company fell to $1.06 billion, or $2.41 per share, in the quarter ended Feb. 29, from $1.43 billion, or $2.92 per share, a year earlier. Earnings on an ongoing basis were $2.42 per share.
Monsanto reiterated its ongoing 2016 earning per share guidance of $4.40 to $5.10 after lowering the outlook last month amid currency headwinds and heightened pricing competition,
Net sales fell 12.8 percent to $4.53 billion.
Analysts on average had expected a profit of $2.44 on revenue of $4.76 billion, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
Monsanto shares rose Wednesday by 90 cents to close at $87.

Graphic

 
 This Monday, Aug. 31, 2015 photo shows the Monsanto logo at the Farm Progress Show in Decatur, Ill. (AP Photo/Seth Perlman) 

Load-Date: April 7, 2016


End of Document


People in Business: Purnell joins BJC to focus on community health
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 31, 2020 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 356 words
Body


Jason Purnell joined BJC HealthCare as vice president of community health improvement.
In the newly created position, Purnell will be responsible for the development, implementation and evaluation of BJC's community health programs, ensuring they are responsive to community needs. The role will help accelerate BJC's focus on eliminating health disparities as identified in the five-year strategic plan. Purnell will oversee connections with community-based programs and organizations that offer primary, secondary and tertiary prevention for chronic conditions, particularly those identified in BJC community health needs assessments.
Purnell joins BJC from the Brown School at Washington University, where he led Health Equity Works, the new name and expanded mission of the initiative previously referred to as For the Sake of All.
He will continue to hold a faculty position.
Purnell holds a doctorate in counseling psychology from Ohio State University, a master's degree in public health from the University of Rochester, and a bachelor's degree in government and philosophy from Harvard.
---
Central Bank of St. Louis added David Beck as a senior vice president, commercial leasing.
Nancy H. Blattner was named president of Fontbonne University.
Josh Jones was hired as an architectural sales representative for Winco Window Co.
Will Hanke, president of Window Treatment Marketing Pros, was named to the board of Custom Home Décor Network, a professional association.
Don Kiernan was hired as vice president, sales and marketing, for the telecom expense management division of Cass Information Systems Inc.
Ocelot Consulting added Adrian Cartier as vice president of data science.
Amy Nash, director of operations at Nash Properties LLC, was elected to the Midwest BankCentre Women Connect advisory board.
Timetria Murphy-Watson was promoted to director of operations for the St. Louis region of Urban Strategies Inc.
Kacey Cordes, vice president at U.S. Bancorp Community Development Corp., was named chair of Urban Land Institute St. Louis District Council. Cordes was also named to chair the national ULI Public-Private Partnership Council.

Graphic

 
 Purnell Beck  Blattner  Jones Hanke Kiernan Cartier Nash Murphy-Watson Cordes 

Load-Date: July 31, 2020


End of Document


Laura Jean Bierut: Breaking the opioid-addiction chain
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 7, 2019 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2019 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A13
Length: 792 words
Byline:  By Laura Jean Bierut  
Body


There is no doubt that the opioid epidemic, which has been building in the U.S. for the past two decades, is a public health crisis. But after a slow start, public health efforts are targeting this issue at the local, state and federal levels.
Missouri has prioritized expanding access to life-saving medications naloxone (marketed as Narcan) - a drug that reverses the deadly effects of an overdose - and buprenorphine and methadone, two medications aimed at taming opioid cravings. To increase access to treatment, the state also contracts with drug-treatment centers that provide counseling aimed at breaking addiction. Unfortunately, however, most treatment centers do not fully use these evidence-based medication approaches, nor do they publicly report their patients' treatment outcomes. So their effectiveness is largely unknown.
In determining what works best for Missourians, reliable data from all avenues of treatment are essential. And while there's no easy, surefire fix to the opioid epidemic, data we do have most strongly supports Missouri's "medication first" approach. This stresses the use of medication as an essential starting point in treatment. Providing medication at the outset not only puts patients in a position in which they can engage in other interventions, such as counseling, without suffering opioid withdrawal, it lessens the risk of relapse and death as they're waiting for more comprehensive interventions.
An evaluation shows this strategy increased the use of medication as part of treatment for opioid-use disorder - from 44% of those treated prior to "medication first," to 85% after it was adopted. This approach also resulted in people being able to receive medication treatment right away, as opposed to after eight days in treatment. Further, people who were treated with medication were two times more likely to remain in treatment, and the overall costs of treatment per patient fell by an average of 21% when the "medication first" model was used.
In December 2018, my colleagues and I at Washington University applied jointly with the Missouri Institute of Mental Health for a $110 million grant from the National Institutes of Health to develop effective, innovative and sustainable approaches to reduce opioid overdose deaths in Missouri. Our proposal focused on identifying and deploying interventions in collaboration with the most seriously affected communities. We set an ambitious goal of reducing overdose deaths by 40% over four years.
That proposal followed data and science. We embraced medication-based treatment, and we doubled down on the life-saving approach of saturating communities with naloxone. Opioid-use disorder has many origins, but at its center, it is a brain disease. The brain is hijacked by opioids, and to get this biological system under control, long-term medication management ultimately is the most effective treatment. With counseling only, over 90% of people with opioid use disorder relapse within six months.
A lack of data has been a key impediment in confronting this epidemic. For example, we were unable to access the number of people in jail with opioid-use disorder. We could not get data on patient outcomes from many of the treatment programs that receive state funding. To make treatment better, faster, less expensive and sustainable, we need data from the many efforts underway so we can know what works and what does not.
Though our application was rated as excellent, we were unsuccessful in bringing to Missouri the National Institutes of Health funds we had sought. The fatal flaw of our application was that the reviewers thought we could not financially support our efforts to fight opioid addiction beyond the four years supported by the grant because Missouri is not a Medicaid-expansion state. Nonetheless, the process resulted in valuable research and in successful projects to develop guidelines to help people in recovery return to work; to test innovative treatment approaches in the emergency department; and to further educate health-care providers.
The greatest lesson learned from this process is that data shows what works best. We have to ask - and we have to show - how we can help our government agencies, health care, and justice systems be better stewards of our tax dollars and provide the most cost-effective services. We can only know our interventions are working, or not working, through evaluation of data properly generated by the different agencies involved. The data must be shared with evidence-minded professionals intent on saving lives and stemming this heartbreaking public health crisis.
> Dr. Laura Jean Bierut is a physician-scientist and a professor of psychiatry at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis.

Load-Date: November 7, 2019


End of Document


Illinois to move to next phase of reopening Friday, allowing indoor dining
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 23, 2020 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1265 words
Byline:  BY ERIN HEFFERNAN  St. Louis Post-Dispatch - Bryce Gray of the Post-Dispatch contributed to this report. 
Body


Illinois officials announced Monday that the state will move this week to the next phase of reopening, allowing indoor dining at restaurants and for businesses like gyms, youth camps, movie theaters and museums to resume operations.
All areas of the state on Friday will enter Phase 4 of Gov. J.B. Pritzker's coronavirus pandemic reopening plan after meeting targets showing no significant increases in COVID-19 metrics, including deaths, hospitalizations and in rates of positive tests.
The move toward reopening came as Missouri health officials are contending with a spike in COVID-19 cases in rural parts of the state.
Phase 4 in Illinois will also increase limits on gatherings to 50 people from the current 10, depending on the size of the space, allowing for larger meetings, weddings and funerals.
Masks and social distancing should continue in public throughout the state, according to the plan.
For indoor dining, capacity is limited to 25% with no more than 10 people in a group and tables spaced at least six feet apart.
For businesses like Papa Vito's pizzeria, which has four locations in the Metro East, the new phase is a welcome change, said the family restaurant's president, Jamie Geoppo.
"One of the good things for us is that even in a pandemic, everybody wants pizza," Geoppo said. "But being closed for dine-in has definitely affected us, you kind of have to mark off about 10% of your menu because in take-out you sell a lot less desserts and beverages."
Geoppo said he expects at least the downtown Belleville Papa Vito's location to reopen its dining room Friday, with the other locations to soon follow.
"We've had people calling up asking when we'll fully open and reading the ‘Closed for dining' sign outside and hanging their head a bit, so I think there'll be people wanting to come," Geoppo said. "I just want to remind people that they'll need some patience and understanding. I hope they remember that everybody is working hard, but it's going to be new for all of us."
Owners of other businesses, like the historic Lincoln Theatre in downtown Belleville, may wait to reopen, owner Dave Schoenborn said.
"We'll see how the first week or so goes," said Schoenborn, who was still reviewing the state's reopening plan Monday. "We're trying to figure out the best timing: Just because you can reopen doesn't necessarily mean you should."
Schoenborn said he does plan to reopen the theater this summer and is closely watching movie release dates, which have often been pushed back. In the meantime, he's installed contactless payment, order-ahead concessions and an online ticket system that blocks out seats for social distancing.
Obstacles remain, though. Limits of 50 people per theater are just a fraction of available seat space and the theater is trying now to buy enough cleaning supplies to last, Shoenborn said.
"We're in a unique business and it's going to be closed longer than most places," Shoenborn said. "And we just want to reopen the right way."
Event spaces, gyms and indoor recreation facilities will be allowed to reach 50% of their building capacity, while museums, zoos and outdoor spectator events, including sports, can resume at 20% or 25% capacity. Concessions at sporting events will be allowed to resume with some restrictions.
Day camps will be allowed to have no more than 15 people in a group and can resume water activities, according to the plan. The state told county governments it expects to release detailed guidance on pools later this week, Bryan Whitaker, assistant director of St. Clair County's Emergency Management Agency, said during a Monday briefing.
Pritzker's office estimated that bringing the state into Phase 4 would bring about 400,000 people back into the workplace, accounting for about 7% of the state's workforce. The governor's office estimated the phase will return about $30 billion in annual gross domestic product to the state.
"Science and data are the overarching guardrails for how Illinois will keep moving forward," Pritzker said in a statement. "By continuing to wear face coverings and following the guidance from health experts we can continue to safely reopen our economy and move forward together."
Illinois reported 462 new coronavirus cases Monday, the lowest daily increase in the state since late March. The state has had 137,224 confirmed cases and 6,671 deaths from the disease since the start of the pandemic. Key metrics tracking the virus have improved in Illinois this month, including the seven-day average rate of positive COVID-19 tests, which had fallen by Saturday to 2.5%, down from about 7% when most of Illinois entered Phase 3 at the end of May.
Despite the falling numbers and easing restrictions, St. Clair County Chairman Mark Kern advised residents to keep wearing masks in public and remain cautious.
"Let's keep our numbers low," he said. "Let's not follow the lead of Arizona and Florida where now they're having to see big spikes and go back on the phases."
The next phase of the state's reopening plan - Phase 5, or "Illinois Restored" - will lift most restrictions, allowing for gatherings of any size, including large events and festivals, and all businesses to resume without capacity limits. The state will enter that phase when either a vaccine or treatment options are widely available or there are no new cases for a sustained period and health care capacity is no longer a concern.
A surge in cases could also make areas of Illinois return to earlier phases of the plan, with restrictions reimposed.
MISSOURI INCREASE
Across the Mississippi River in Missouri on Monday, the state continued to see the biggest increases in cases in Southwest Missouri, adding 140 cases and five additional deaths statewide. There have been 18,143 cases and 961 deaths confirmed in Missouri since the start of the pandemic.
Within the last week, cases in McDonald County, which borders Oklahoma and Arkansas, spiked to 473 from 128. Nearby Newton County's cases increased in that same time to 279 from 110. Jasper County in the same area went from 115 to 221 confirmed cases.
Joplin, Missouri, which spans both Newton and Jasper counties, has the second highest average growth rate of cases in the country, according to The New York Times.
Lisa Cox, spokeswoman for the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services, on Monday didn't specify the reason for the surge in cases in the area, but said the state hoped to release more information Tuesday about the outbreak in Joplin and surrounding communities.
The Joplin Globe reported Saturday that workers at the Tyson Foods meat processing plant in Noel in McDonald County would undergo mass testing.
The same increases have not been seen in the St. Louis area, where the seven-day average of hospitalizations for confirmed or suspected COVID-19 fell by almost 20 to 233 Monday, according to the St. Louis Metropolitan Pandemic Task Force. Hospitalizations peaked in the area in mid-April at 757.
But St. Louis Mayor Lyda Krewson said she's monitoring increases in cases in more rural areas of the state for effects they may have on the metro area.
"We are a little bit concerned," the mayor said during a Monday briefing, "that in a lot of new cases in outstate Missouri that a lot of those folks will rely on our regional hospital system and may become hospitalized here."
---
CORONAVIRUS TOLL CASES/DEATHS as of 8 p.m. Monday - *Figures have not been updated since Friday
Missouri: 18,143/961 Illinois: 137,224/6,671 St. Louis*: 2,319/154 St. Louis Co.: 5,878/551 St. Charles Co.: 959/72 Jefferson Co.: 465/21 Franklin Co.: 188/18 Metro East: 2,745/214

Notes

   BISTATE RESPONSE 


Load-Date: June 23, 2020


End of Document


Six weeks into stay-at-home order, Illinois governor announces phased reopening plan
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 6, 2020 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1004 words
Byline:  By Robert Patrick and Erin Heffernan St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


CHICAGO - Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker on Tuesday announced a five-phase plan for gradually reopening the state by region, but noted that current restrictions imposed because of the coronavirus pandemic will stay in place at least through May 29.
The "Restore Illinois" plan divides the state into four regions, with the Metro East included in Southern Illinois. Each area will move through five stages of reopening based on regional health care benchmarks and medical capacity, according to the governor's office.
"Science and data are our overarching guardrails," Pritzker said at a Tuesday news conference announcing the plan. He said the phases follow "the best epidemiological recommendations" and were based on input from residents, public officials and medical experts.
Illinois is now in Phase 2 - titled "flattening" - which allows some nonessential businesses such as retailers to open for curbside pickup and delivery and requires people to wear masks in public.
No part of the state will move to the next phase of reopening, "recovery," which allows most businesses to reopen with some limits, until May 29 at the earliest.
Pritzker said that's because health statistics must be stable or improving for weeks at a time in a region and each area's health care system must have the capacity to handle a surge in cases before moving to the next phase.
Pritzker said the state Department of Public Health will be tracking the data and making each region's status available online every day.
The stages created by the plan are described by the governor's office as:
Phase 1 - Rapid Spread: The state has moved past this stage for now, but areas could return to it if mitigation efforts are not successful. In this stage, the rate of infection and number of patients admitted to hospitals is high or rapidly increasing. Strict stay-at-home orders are in place and only essential businesses remain open.
Phase 2 - Flattening: All of Illinois is now in this stage as of a May 1 executive order relaxing some measures in the stay-at-home order. In this phase, the rate of infection and the number of patients admitted to hospitals is decreasing, moving toward a flat or downward trajectory. Nonessential retail stores reopen for curbside pickup and delivery. Residents are required to wear a face covering in public, and more outdoor activities such as golf, boating and fishing are allowed.
Phase 3 - Recovery: No part of Illinois will reach this phase until May 29 at the earliest. To reach this phase, the rate of infection and number of patients admitted to hospitals must be stable or declining. Nonessential manufacturing, offices, retail, barbershops and salons will then reopen with capacity limits and other safety precautions. Health and fitness centers can conduct outdoor classes or one-on-one personal training. Limited child care and summer programs can reopen with health department guidance, Pritzker said. Teleworking will still be "strongly encouraged," he said, and employers should do their utmost to make remote accommodations for older or "COVID-vulnerable" workers, he said. Gatherings of 10 or fewer people are allowed. Face coverings and social distancing are still the norm.
Phase 4 - Revitalization: The rate of infection and number of patients admitted to hospitals continues to decline. Gatherings of 50 or fewer are allowed. Restaurants, spas, cinemas, theaters and bars reopen. Travel resumes. Child care, gyms, schools and higher education reopen under guidance from the state health department. Face coverings and social distancing continue to be the norm.
Phase 5 - Illinois Restored: This will come when a vaccine or a highly effective treatment is widely available or there are no more new cases over a sustained period. In this stage, the economy fully reopens with safety precautions continuing. Conventions, festivals and large events are permitted, and all businesses, schools and recreation areas can open with new safety guidance reflecting the lessons learned during the pandemic.
Pritzker said Tuesday that a "switch" to restore the entire state economy at once simply does not exist with a virus that can't be eliminated by medical science. The governor said he wouldn't open the economy because a "loud but tiny minority would like to indulge in that fantasy."
Pritzker also said the state did not want to "police" the state's more than 12 million residents, and would instead be working with local health officials and law enforcement to monitor violations and take action when necessary.
Asked in the news conference about reports of businesses that were quietly opening early, but with social distancing and fewer than 10 people inside, Pritzker said local law enforcement and officials should remind business owners that they could have their permits and licenses revoked.
"There is action that the state can take in enforcement, but we're trying not to," Pritzker said. "Most people in Illinois are doing the right thing and they won't be patronizing those stores knowing that they may be spreading the virus."
Officials also announced the largest number of fatalities in the state in a 24-hour period Tuesday with 176 deaths, bringing the state's coronavirus death toll to 2,838. There have been 65,962 confirmed cases of the virus in the state since the start of the outbreak, said Dr. Ngozi Ezike, head of the Illinois Department of Public Health.
In the St. Louis metro area, including the Illinois suburbs, more than 400 people with COVID-19 have died since the start of the outbreak.
Missouri, which on Monday entered a phase similar to Phase 3 in Illinois, reported 162 new confirmed cases and 19 additional COVID-19 deaths Tuesday, though the state health department said several of the deaths occurred over the weekend but were not immediately added to the tally.
That brings the state total to 8,916 cases and 377 deaths since the start of the outbreak.
Missouri has now tested about 100,750 people for the virus. Illinois, which has about double the population, has tested 346,286.

Notes

   BISTATE RESPONSE 


Graphic

 
 Illinois will be divided into four regions that can independently move through reopening phases based on local health care benchmarks amid the coronavirus pandemic. Photo courtesy of the office of Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker.   Illinois will be divided into four regions that can independently move through reopening phases based on local health care benchmarks amid the coronavirus pandemic. No part of the state will reach Phase 3 before May 29. Photo courtesy of the office of Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker.  

Load-Date: May 6, 2020


End of Document


New research facilities mark biggest milestone of Monsanto's $400 million Chesterfield expansion - Correction Appended
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 2, 2017 Saturday
FINAL EDITION


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 517 words
Byline:  By Bryce Gray St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


CHESTERFIELD - Stepping to a lectern in the gleaming new confines of the company's expanded research and development facilities, Monsanto CEO Hugh Grant said a lot with just the first two words out of his mouth:
"Guten tag."
The German greeting was presumably a nod to representatives from Bayer in attendance at Friday's ceremony christening the new Chesterfield facility, but also a hint at the anticipated direction of Monsanto's own future, with the two companies looking to complete their $63.5 billion merger in the first quarter of 2018.
Regardless of the ownership that awaits the company, Monsanto officials emphasized that the Chesterfield campus would retain its place as a center of innovation for agricultural science - a status they say is only further anchored by the recent completion of the new, 400,000-square-foot research building showcased Friday, and by the pending merger.
"What the deal really means, in my mind, is a continued ramp-up of innovation," said Grant. "This site becomes an R and D engine - even more so than in the last 10 years."
The new building accommodates 250 research labs and represents "by far the biggest milestone" within the company's $400 million expansion that began in 2013, said company spokeswoman Christi Dixon.
Another phase of the expansion was completed last fall, when 36 greenhouses opened, encompassing an additional 105,000 square feet.
"We're already thinking about how we move scientists from Bayer into this facility," said Robb Fraley, Monsanto's executive vice president and chief technology officer, after speaking at Friday's event.
About 350 employees from Monsanto's regulatory affairs team have also recently transitioned to the Chesterfield campus, many of whom are now housed in the new building. They had previously been stationed at the company's Creve Coeur headquarters.
Fraley said "significant progress" was being made in the merger process, as Bayer and Monsanto seek approval from antitrust regulators in dozens of countries. He said more than half of those countries have signed off already, with the U.S. and Europe representing the main exceptions thus far.
If the merger goes through, Fraley said Monsanto's expanded St. Louis operations would be the headquarters for seeds and traits research and for the combined companies' operations in North America - which he said remains the largest market for sales.
Monsanto executives said no single area or product line would be emphasized most at the expanded facility, with research being done across the board. Company leaders conveyed excitement, however, about work at the intersection of fields like data science, robotics, and climatology.
Fraley noted the irony that, despite being arguably the oldest industry on the planet, agriculture is "probably the last industry to undergo the transformation and become digitized." But that's starting to change, as Monsanto and other companies seek applications for new technology.
"All of that technology is now flooding into agriculture and transforming modern farming," Fraley said. "We're leveraging all of those advances right here."
Correction


Monsanto CEO Hugh Grant did not use a German greeting during a dedication of the company's new Chesterfield facility on Friday. Also the Bayer-Monsanto merger is expected to be completed in early 2018, according to company officials. A Business story on Saturday was incorrect.
Correction-Date: December 5, 2017


Graphic

 
 Begun in 2013, Monsanto recently opened a new, 400,000-square-foot research building on its Chesterfield campus. Home to 250 labs, the building was part of a $400 million overall expansion of research and development facilities at the site. (Photo courtesy of Monsanto.) 

Load-Date: December 9, 2017


End of Document


Its weedkillers under attack, Bayer develops new herbicide
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 14, 2020 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 409 words
Byline:  BY BRYCE GRAY St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


ST. LOUIS - With a pair of the company's mainstay herbicides losing punch against resistant weeds and under siege from lawsuits, Bayer officials said Thursday that its scientists are advancing development of a new weedkilling molecule - billed as the first new product of its kind to come along in decades.
The announcement was a key highlight from calls with investors and the media, as Bayer Crop Science officials provided updates on the company's research and development pipeline.
The new herbicide molecule - the name of which has not yet been released - is entering a second phase of development, according to Bayer, and is not expected to become commercially available for nearly a decade.
"We're super excited by this breakthrough," said Bob Reiter, the head of research and development for Bayer's Crop Science Division.
Company officials said it is seen as an eventual complement - and not a replacement - for today's popular and profitable weedkilling chemicals like glyphosate, sold as Roundup, and dicamba, both of which are facing high-profile lawsuits over allegations of adverse impacts to human or crop health.
Bayer, however, outlined continued reliance on each. Reiter described them as "anchors" of the company's herbicide offerings, citing their respective versatility and effectiveness killing weeds.
The company also said that public complaints and concerns regarding Roundup and dicamba did not contribute any added urgency to the development of alternatives.
"There's always urgency for growers to have more choice and more options," said Reiter.
The emerging technology has been in the works for more than five years already, Reiter said. That work began under Bayer, prior to its 2018 acquisition of Monsanto, the Creve Coeur-based crop science giant.
Details remain scarce about how the new product will work, but Bayer says it will kill weeds in novel ways, compared to existing herbicides. That new "mode of action," Reiter said, is expected to make it harder for plants to develop resistance.
"Weeds haven't seen this before, so they're going to be challenged," said Reiter.
Bayer said it has been 30 years since a similarly novel weedkilling technology debuted in agriculture.
Reiter expressed hope that continued breakthroughs could await the company, particularly as data science and artificial intelligence help accelerate the process of identifying promising angles for innovation.
"There's still a lot of room for discovery," he said.

Load-Date: February 14, 2020


End of Document


Wash. U. professor takes genetics research to wider student audience
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 18, 2008 Tuesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. D3
Length: 827 words
Byline: DEB PETERSON
Body


Sarah C. R. Elgin, 63, a professor at Washington University since 1984 and currently the Viktor Hamburger Professor of Arts & Sciences.
BIOGRAPHICAL DATA: 
Family: Married to Robert Lawrence Elgin, an applied mathematician who is semi-retired and active on the University City School Board. Two children: Ben, 33, a software engineer working in the Research Triangle region of North Carolina; and Thomas, 25, a student working on his master's degree in operations research at Stanford University. Both sons were valedictorians of their respective classes at U. City High School. Sarah Elgin is the middle child of three children born to Carlisle Bishop Roberts and Lorene West Roberts in Oregon. Her father was a lawyer and an assistant U.S. Attorney for Oregon; her mother taught violin and elementary school.
EDUCATION: B.A., magna cum laude in Chemistry from Pomona College in Claremont, Calif., 1967; Ph.D. in Biochemistry from the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in Pasadena, Calif., 1971; Postdoctoral work in protein chemistry and immunology at Caltech, 1971-1973.
I understand that you are the program director of the Genomics Education Partnership. What is the partnership about?
The goal of the Genomics Education Partnership is to provide opportunities for undergraduate students to participate in genomics research. It's a way of getting genetics education into general curriculums, mostly undergraduate but some high school, too. Some undergraduate institutions don't have the resources that are available at a research university like Wash U. The partnership is a collaboration between a growing number of those primarily undergraduate institutions and the Biology Department and Genome Sequencing Center here.
What do the students do if their college, university or high school participates?
They learn to take raw sequence data to high quality finished sequence, and to annotate genes and other features. Their work leads to the analysis of a question in genomics and research publication. We also organize research projects and provide training and workshops for faculty and teaching assistants.
Who else is involved with the partnership?
The work we do would not be possible without the support of the Genome Sequencing Center, which is headed by Elaine Mardis and Rick Wilson. We also rely on the efforts of my colleagues, Chris Shaffer and Wilson Leung.
Why is this a good way to teach science?
We have found that it's a great way to get kids involved in science because it's all web-based. That makes it easy to share information and to find information.
Your father was a lawyer and your mom a teacher. Are your siblings scientists like you?
No, I'm the only one. I liked science and I decided at 9 that I was going to be a scientist. I liked taking things apart and putting them back together again. My older sister teaches at the Art Institute of Portland and my younger brother teaches psychology at Idaho State University in Pocatello, Idaho. My parents believed in education, but they didn't care what we did with it.
When and why did you move to St. Louis?
We moved here in 1981 because I got a position as an assistant professor of biology at Wash U.
It looks from your curriculum vitae that you spend a lot of your time teaching, as well as doing research. Do you like both?
My goal is to merge my teaching and my research methods. I think both areas are terribly important.
Is there any way you could describe your research so that my readers and I could understand it?
Sure - what we're trying to understand is how the DNA is packaged and what dictates what's packaged and in what way it is packaged. There are huge amounts of DNA that are not genes - about 95 percent of it is other stuff, like retroviruses and transposable elements. We don't know if that stuff is junk, like the stuff you put in the attic, or garbage, like the stuff you put out at the curb.
I understand you also work with a science outreach program. What's that about?
That started in 1989 with the University City Schools, which is where my sons went to school. We are big proponents of public education. I started working with the district's science curriculum supervisor to bring Washington University science faculty into those schools. We wanted to provide students with interactive environmental science and genetics projects. The pilot program was a success, and eventually we expanded it and founded the university's Science Outreach program, which serves K-12 schools across the St. Louis region. The program has reached 38,000 kids by now. Victoria May, our terrific director, makes it all possible.
I would guess you don't have a lot of free time but, if you do, what do you enjoy doing?
Hiking, skiing - all the stuff I did growing up in Oregon. My husband grew up in California so we like to go back to the West Coast as much as possible.
What do you like to read?
If it isn't scientific journals, I read the Post-Dispatch, the New Yorker and the Economist.

Notes

 close up • deb peterson 


Graphic

 
 PHOTO - Sarah C. R. Elgin 

Load-Date: November 18, 2008


End of Document


Local lawmakers weigh what they can - and cannot - regulate in budding business
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 22, 2019 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2019 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1733 words
Byline:  By Nassim Benchaabane St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


Missouri became the 33rd state to legalize marijuana for medicinal purposes after 65% of voters in November approved Amendment 2. That started a stampede of business owners looking to capitalize on the new market.
Sales of various products are to start as early as spring. Tax proceeds and licensing fees are supposed to go into a new veterans health care fund, and are expected to generate about $20 million a year.
Licenses will be granted by Dec. 31 for medical marijuana-related businesses. Under the new law, the state is required to approve at least 10 testing facilities, 60 commercial growers, 86 facilities that make marijuana-infused products and 192 dispensaries - 24 dispensaries for each of Missouri's eight congressional districts. Officials have said they will keep licensing to the minimum. That will mean about 48 dispensaries for the St. Louis area. 
At least 667 applications - including growers, testing labs and other marijuana-based businesses - have been submitted for brick-and-mortar sites in the St. Louis area, from Elsberry to De Soto and from Washington to the city of St. Louis, according to a Post-Dispatch analysis of state records. Just under 400 of the applications were for dispensaries that would sell pot.
Missouri has approved at least at least 9,722 patients with qualifying conditions to legally buy or use marijuana, and in some cases grow it at home.
ST. CHARLES - One mayor wanted to know if people living next to a day care could grow marijuana at home. A city consultant asked whether local police can access Missouri's list of legal marijuana patients. An alderman inquired whether the state would give a boost to minority-owned marijuana businesses. Another official was concerned about where people would be allowed to smoke.
Local lawmakers across Missouri are considering the impact that marijuana - the state's newest medicinal and cash crop - will have on their communities once sales begin, as soon as spring. At least 9,700 people statewide have been approved to legally use marijuana.
"It's such a new thing and such a big change," said Dan Ross, director of the Missouri Municipal League, which includes small towns to wide suburbs across the state. "We're feeling our way through this and looking at experiences in other states. But it's not cut and dry."
The state municipal league reserved the closing keynote session of its recent annual conference in St. Charles to educate more than 200 local officials on Missouri's medical marijuana program. The league published guides on medical marijuana for its members, including one addressing changes to personnel laws.
St. Louis-area lawmakers asked about their authority to tax and regulate the new businesses. Others wanted to know whether marijuana sales will boost local tax revenue or employment. And some wanted to know how legal marijuana could complicate policing, affect property values and make neighborhoods smell.
"I think, generally speaking, the cities are looking at this more as ‘OK, the state has established this program, so now how is this going to fit in our community?'" Pat Kelly, director of the Municipal League of Metro St. Louis, said last week.The municipal league, which includes more than 80 St. Louis-area local governments, first met early this year to discuss how to adapt to a long-illegal substance becoming legal in certain uses.
Questions include how local laws will intersect with state laws and regulations - not to mention federal laws that still classify marijuana as an illegal substance. In other states, such conflicts have led to lawsuits.
Twenty-five cities in California, for example, have sued the state to overturn a rule allowing home delivery statewide regardless of whether cities allow commercial pot sales. And marijuana businesses have sued state or local lawmakers over license or permit denials and other regulations.
Advocates of the industry say cities shouldn't worry that marijuana will cause drastic changes, pointing to 32 other states, as well as the District of Columbia, that have either fully legalized marijuana or legalized it for medicinal use since California first allowed medical marijuana in 1996. And they say it represents an economic boon, pointing to a state auditor's office estimate that medical marijuana sales could generate $6 million in annual tax revenue for local governments.
The businesses will pay employees well and hire local contractors for services, Eric Walter, an attorney with the Missouri Cannabis Trade Association, told lawmakers at the state municipal conference. The association published a 22-page guide for municipalities about the state's new medical marijuana program with a template for city ordinances and photos and floor plans for dispensaries in other states. The facilities will be high-tech and well-secured, and their owners "sophisticated business professionals," Walter said.
"They're going to be good civic, corporate citizens," Walter said. "Local governments and municipalities should want these businesses in their communities."
States that have fully legalized marijuana have all exceeded their projections for tax revenues on pot sales, said Liberty Vittert, a Washington University visiting professor of practice in data science who studies marijuana's impact on tax revenue, crime and teenage marijuana usage.
There is no correlation between marijuana legalization and increases in crime, and while there have been slight increases in teenage usage in states with legal weed, the increase could be attributed to users being more comfortable self-reporting, she said.
As for tax revenue, those states may not have met expectations in the first year, but they exceeded them once businesses were licensed and the industry was in full swing, she said.
"There is no doubt that their projections are, if nothing, conservative for what they saw in a few years - it just doesn't happen overnight," she said.
Buffer zones
Overall, local governments are fairly limited in the ordinances they can impose on medical marijuana. Most questions about commercial production and private use are addressed in the constitutional amendment Missouri voters approved in November that legalized marijuana, as well as rules state regulators drafted with public input.
State law says local governments can't prohibit legal marijuana businesses or use. But they can set the "time, place and manner" in which marijuana businesses operate, a process that is well underway in many area cities as they field inquiries from hundreds of prospective marijuana shops competing for a limited number of state licenses. That includes 400 hopeful dispensaries competing for a little more than 48 licenses for the region.
Cities have a right to waive a state requirement that forbids marijuana businesses within 1,000 feet of any school, day care or church, and they retain their usual authority to amend zoning laws to include marijuana businesses and require special permits for businesses that want to locate near residential areas.
"When it comes down to the regulation, the question is where in the city is it going to be appropriate," said Kelly, of the Municipal League of Metro St. Louis. "I think that was very clear from the state, that these businesses will still have to abide by local ordinances and all the same kinds of things that would apply to a liquor license or a new grocery store."
The city of St. Louis opted to waive the buffer zone after finding it difficult to locate any sites that would be far enough away from either a school, day care or church. The St. Louis County Council opted to keep the buffer at 1,000 feet in unincorporated areas. Creve Coeur adopted a 300-foot buffer zone. O'Fallon, Missouri, decided on 750 feet.
Many aspects of the industry have yet to be written into state or local laws, said Kenneth Heinz, an attorney who has represented several local cities.
"I bet if you look in your ordinances, you probably aren't going to find the word ‘dispensary' in there," Heinz said to those at the state municipal league conference. Rules for pharmacies or businesses with liquor licenses could also apply to marijuana dispensaries, he added.
Missouri law, for example, forbids cities from levying more "taxes" on marijuana. "Fees," which are defined as a payment of a service provided by a local government, could be levied, but businesses could sue if they feel they're unfair, Heinz said.
"So the question is, ‘When does a business license fee become a revenue-generating bias?'" he said. "All of this needs to be fleshed out with litigation," he said.
Lyndall Fraker, who directs Missouri's marijuana regulators, said at the conference that an inquiry about whether marijuana dispensaries could also sell alcohol was the first time he encountered the question. The department has largely been focused on establishing regulations for marijuana businesses and a scoring rubric for the competitive licensing process, he said.
He said state agencies are meeting every two weeks to provide guidance on medical marijuana's impact on other areas of governance, including labor laws and social services.
"We're just now getting to that part of the program," he said.
‘That's open season'
Among other concerns was how much authority local lawmakers have over people legally growing marijuana at home, to whom the state's 1,000-foot distance requirement and local zoning ordinances for businesses don't apply.
"If I'm hearing this right - that's open season," said St. Peters Mayor Len Pagano. "So they can be right next to a day care, or be next to a church."
Home growers need state approval and are allowed a limited amount, Fraker said. They need to meet state requirements that include a well-secured room accessible only by the patient or a licensed caregiver, and must allow state inspectors inside at any time.
In the end, replacement of the illegal marijuana trade with a state-regulated one will be an improvement, he said.
Roslyn Brown, Pine Lawn aldermanic president, said after the conference that the health and safety of children who live in homes legally approved to grow marijuana were among her chief concerns. Pine Lawn is a mostly residential community, she said. But the city also sees an opportunity for marijuana sales revenue.
"These kinds of things need to be worked out for a small community like ours that really needs the tax dollars," Brown said. "We're still in the discovery process."

Graphic

 
 Executive Director of the Municipal League of Metro St. Louis, Pat Kelly, center, talks to Olivette City Council member Sidney Clark at a meeting in the chambers of the Chesterfield City Hall on Thursday, Jan. 24, 2019. Photo by Colter Peterson, cpeterson@post-dispatch.com  Lyndall Fraker (left), director of Missouri Medical Marijuana, and Dr. Randall Williams, director of the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services, take questions and comments from a speaker about implementation of the new medical marijuana law in Missouri during a public forum at the St. Louis Community College Florissant Valley campus on Thursday, Feb. 28, 2019. Photo by David Carson, dcarson@post-dispatch.com  Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services Director Dr. Randall Williams answered questions from more than a hundred people interested in learning more about the medical marijuana industry in Missouri at a conference hosted by the Missouri Cannabis Industry Association on Saturday Feb. 23, 2019 in St. Charles at the Grand Opera House Banquet Center.  

Load-Date: September 23, 2019


End of Document


People in Business: Hoeffner to lead new division at Cass Commercial Bank
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 12, 2019 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2019 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. B2
Length: 275 words
Body


George Hoeffner joined Cass Commercial Bank to lead a new division focused on financing equipment purchases for businesses, nonprofit organizations and municipalities through capital and municipal leases.
Hoeffner was named senior vice president. He joins Cass with 28 years of experience in equipment finance, the last six spent with Central Bank of St. Louis where he launched its equipment finance group. He previously founded Starboard Capital Group Inc., an entity that marketed loan and lease products to middle market companies.
Hoeffner earned his bachelor's degree in business administration and finance from the University of Missouri-Columbia.
---
Sandra J. Tatoian joined Goldenberg Heller & Antognoli PC.
Kyle Grate was named vice president of operations at St. Joseph Hospital - Lake Saint Louis.
Ryan Gierer was promoted to senior project manager at Knoebel Construction.
Sam Welge was promoted to manager of automation and energy solutions at Murphy Co.
Abeles and Hoffman promoted Millie Tutlam to tax supervisor.
The Doe Run Co. promoted Michael Montgomery to senior counsel and director of regulatory affairs. Tammy Stankey was promoted to director of communications.
Steve DeMarco joined TopOPPS Inc. as president and chief revenue officer.
Cordell Practice Management Group promoted the following: Lauren Phillips to senior manager of data science and quality; Amanda Fowler to associate director of client services; and Sarah Ruttan to associate director of training and legal operations.
Greg Gelzinnis was selected as president of the Northwest Chamber of Commerce.
Investa Management named John Davis as director of finance and accounting.

Graphic

 
 George Hoeffner joined Cass Commercial Bank to lead a new division focused on financing equipment purchases for businesses, not-for-profit organizations and municipalities through capital and municipal leases.  Investa Management named John Davis as director of finance and accounting.  Kyle Grate was named vice president of operations at SSM Health St. Joseph Hospital – Lake Saint Louis.  Sam Welge was promoted to manager of automation and energy solutions at Murphy Co.  Cordell Practice Management Group promoted the following: Lauren Phillips to senior manager of data science and quality; Amanda Fowler to associate director of client services; and Sarah Ruttan to associate director of training and legal ops.   Ryan Gierer was promoted to senior project manager at Knoebel Construction.  Sandra J. Tatoian joined Goldenberg Heller & Antognoli PC.  Greg Gelzinnis was selected as president of the Northwest Chamber of Commerce. 

Load-Date: May 16, 2019


End of Document


Joe's St. Louis: Hamm lands new role. Animal advocate remembered. And you're welcome, KC.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 20, 2019 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2019 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 642 words
Byline:  By Joe Holleman St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


HAMM TIME: Talk about riding a hot streak. Less than a week after his beloved Blues won the Stanley Cup, Variety reported that Jon Hamm has landed a role in the new Clint Eastwood movie, "Richard Jewell."
In an exclusive report, the show-biz bulletin says STL's No. 1 celeb will play an FBI agent investigating the pipe-bombing at Centennial Park during the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
You may recall that Richard Jewell was the real-life security guard named by law enforcement as a possible suspect in the bombing, saying Jewell planted the bomb himself and then ‘found' it to earn praise.
Maintaining his innocence throughout, Jewell was completely exonerated by the FBI three months later - "though his reputation was never restored and his health (was) forever damaged," Variety writes. Jewell died in 2007 at age 44.
Other stars attached to the film are Oscar winners Sam Rockwell, as Jewell's lawyer, and Kathy Bates, as Jewell's mother. Olivia Wilde has been cast as reporter Kathy Scruggs and Paul Walter Hauser will star in the title role.
This will be the 41st directing effort from Eastwood, who turned 89 in May.
PASSING NOTE: A memorial service will be held next week for animal advocate Shirley Sostman, who died Sunday at the age of 89.
Ms. Sostman was a founder of the Missouri Alliance for Animal Legislation in 1990 and served 10 years on its board and one year as its president.
"Shirley was the real deal and a true pioneer," alliance executive director Bob Baker said in a statement. "Her advocacy work in the legislature led to many of our existing animal welfare laws."
Alliance vice president Brook Dubman said, "Shirley was a true champion for animals and a beautiful soul."
In fighting puppy mills and animal fighting, Ms. Sostman worked on numerous investigations into animal cruelty and attended auctions to rescue dogs.
Ms. Sostman also volunteered for the Humane Society of Missouri, Stray Rescue of St. Louis, the St. Louis Zoo and the state's Powder Valley Nature Center.
The memorial service is set for 1 p.m. to 5 p.m. June 30 at Bopp Chapel, 10610 Manchester Road in Kirkwood. For more information, go to maal.org.
YOU'RE WELCOME: St. Louis has even stronger ties to Kansas City, now that Missouri's second city has elected Quinton Lucas as its mayor. Lucas, 34, attended Washington University from 2002 to 2006 and earned a bachelor's degree in political science.
INDEPENDENCE DATA: When it comes to being independent, Missouri is one of the better states in the U.S. - in spite of our bad habits.
As the Fourth of July nears, some interesting points to consider about independence come from the latest list by personal finance website WalletHub: "Most & Least Independent States."
Overall, Missouri finished in the top half, at No. 22.
The list looks at five main categories: financial; governmental; job market; international trade; and vice.
In the "vice" category, we were a lowly No. 43, thanks to our smoking, drinking, gambling, drug use, pornography watching and (love the next two) time spent on social networks and watching television.
We did best in the "international" portion, No. 11, because of our low amount of jobs and income supported directly by exports; and our low employment by foreign-owned firms.
In the other three categories we were in the pack's middle: No. 25 in "financial" (credit scores, debt/income ratio, foreclosure/bankruptcy rates); No. 26 in "job market" (unemployment rates, underemployment rates, job-growth rate); and No. 30 in "government" (federal financial aid, public assistance, subsidized housing.)
Several of our bordering states finished higher, meaning more independent: Nebraska (2); Kansas (10); Iowa (11); and Oklahoma.
Finishing behind us were: Illinois (31); Arkansas (39); Tennessee (42); and last in the Union, Kentucky (50).
The most independent? The scenic Beehive State of Utah.

Notes

   Kicker 


Graphic

 
 Jon Hamm, in a scene from "Mad Men," will star in the new Clint Eastwood movie, "Richard Jewell." Photo by Michael Yarish, AMC via AP  Sostman  Lucas 

Load-Date: June 21, 2019


End of Document


Business digest
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 8, 2018 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 645 words
Byline:  From staff and wire reports 
Body


Water, sewer rates approved - Missouri-American Water Company customers can expect to see new rates this month, according to a announcement Monday from state utility regulators.
The water and sewer utility, whose more than 450,000 statewide customers includes most of St. Louis County, secured approval from the Missouri Public Service Commission to increase revenue by $24 million annually. The company had originally sought an increase of $75 million, including proposed rate hikes of 45 to 48 percent for area residential customers - a point of contention and controversy at recent public hearings. The PSC said the final amount of the rate increase also accounts for the changes to the corporate tax rate changed by federal law in late 2017.
Monthly bills for residential customers will see smaller fixed costs but higher charges for water consumed. The flat charge will shrink from $15.33 to $9 monthly, while St. Louis County customers will pay $4.7814 per 1,000 gallons of water - up from Missouri-American's current price range of $3.7424 to $4.7378, depending on the area. All of the utility's other service areas will pay $6.2469 per 1,000 gallons, except for in Mexico, Mo., which will see a pilot program for an alternate rate structure.
Rate disparities by region were a hot-button issue surrounding the utility's rate request, which many argued asked the 340,000 St. Louis County customers to "subsidize" services across a wider footprint. The PSC's order now consolidates several Missouri-American water rate districts into two such regions: one covering St. Louis County and the other everywhere else.
The settlement with the PSC also delineates sewer rates for the utility's 13,000 sewer customers, including those in communities such as Arnold and Fenton.
Leidos wins $250 million NGA contract - The National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency awarded a $250 million contract to IT firm Leidos.
The contract asks Reston, Va.-based Leidos to provide a variety of analytic support including geospatial and imagery analysis, data science, multimedia services and full motion video analysis.
The work will primarily be performed in Springfield, Va, where NGA is based, and St. Louis, where the NGA has its western headquarters.
Walmart to restrict opioid dispensing - Walmart Inc. said on Monday it would restrict initial acute opioid prescriptions to no more than a seven-day supply as the retailer aims to curb the opioid epidemic in the U.S.
The limit will begin within the next 60 days, the company said.
In January, Walmart said it would provide its customers filling prescriptions for opioids with a packet of powder that would help them dispose of leftover medication.
The company also said on Monday that from Jan. 1, 2020, it would require e-prescriptions for controlled substances, noting that these prescriptions are proven to be less prone to errors and cannot be altered or copied.
The initiatives apply to all the pharmacies of Walmart and its Sam's Club unit in the United States and Puerto Rico.
A-B InBev's pricing challenged - Farmers in South Africa filed a complaint with the country's competition watchdog about Anheuser-Busch InBev's decision to change its pricing formula for buying malt barley, a key ingredient in beer making.
The farmers' lobby group Grain South Africa believes A-B InBev, the world's biggest brewer, contravened one of the conditions set when the country's competition tribunal approved its $106 billion acquisition of rival SABMiller.
In the final approval for A-B InBev's acquisition, South Africa's competition tribunal said the merged entity had to comply with the terms and conditions of SABMiller's existing supply agreements with suppliers.
"We have, at all times, conducted our operations in compliance with the conditions imposed by the Competition Tribunal," A-B InBev Africa spokeswoman Robyn Chalmers said in a statement.

Load-Date: May 12, 2018


End of Document


CASE NOT CLOSED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 20, 1989, WEDNESDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2C
Length: 846 words
Body


I'm writing to express my outrage over the sentencing of the former Clayton police captain, Paul Delling. What has happened to justice? Do we now equate child molestation with traffic violations? At least in the case of driving while intoxicated, the offender loses his license. Circuit Attorney George Peach makes the callous comment, ''That'll stop him from getting another job as a cop.'' So what? The children affected had their innocence destroyed and their confidence in the adult world shattered. The children are sentenced to a lifetime of terrifying memories. Delling is sentenced to a life without being a cop.  During his next physical exam, Peach should ask his doctor for a chest X-ray - not to check for lung cancer but to see if he has a heart.  John Koch Twin Oaks Remedial English In writing, style and content are two things that are important. In Mary McGrory's Aug. 26 column, she uses up newsprint to give us a sixth-grade English lesson on usage: deadwood and jargon. OK, I'm always willing to learn, and the lesson was mildly interesting.  But why does an English lesson have to be a ruse for taking a backhanded swipe at every person and political idea McGrory doesn't like? Does she hope to persuade me of the veracity of her opinions by devoting a couple of sentences to each of a dozen different topics? Or is she stating the platform for a new political party she's starting?  It also seems very presumptuous, even bigoted, to take the well-considered opinions of someone like former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and conveniently misinterpret them to make it sound like he's in favor of the massacre at Tiananmen Square.
Maybe McGrory has learned her lessons on style, but she needs to go back to school and redo her lessons on content. Tell her not to play hooky this time.  One would hope that in the expression of ideas, content would prevail over style.  Orn Backstrom Waynesville, Mo.  The news, printed some time ago, that the newspaper had hired a writing coach was appalling. But in view of the number of incorrect uses of common expressions that continues to appear, apparently that hiring was a good idea.  The question remains: What is he doing to improve the work of the writing staff?  I have noticed the following errors since the appointment of the writing coach: ''My father graduated Harvard in 1911.'' No, he did not. His father was graduated from Harvard in 1911. The institution graduates the student, not the student the institution.  ''The committee is comprised of.'' No, it is not. The committee comprises, or the committee is composed of . . . . .  ''The girl was accepted to college.'' She was accepted by the college.  Thank you for your attention to my request for respect in using the English (American) language.  Jane Kehoe Hassett Kirkwood Just The Facts I have long been saddened by the failure of our educational system to educate adequately about the natural sciences, particularly ecology and biology. This failing was clearly shown by two recent letter writers.  I was particularly appalled at one writer who demanded his woefully ignorant beliefs about the falseness of evolution be taught to schoolchildren (in the form of so-called ''creation science'') and by another, more enlightened soul who, while not disputing evolution for animals, believes that it does not apply any more to humans because of our wonderful technological abilities.  These writers' sincere but mistaken beliefs bode ill for America's ability to compete against those in the world who have been educated without such religious bias and will exacerbate America's increasingly dire environmental difficulties.  Any child who is taught biblical creationism under the guise of science will have great problems in understanding how real science works. In true science, data for and against a theory are sought. In ''creation science'' only supporting data are sought or accepted.  And to mistakenly believe that human beings are exempt from the laws of natural selection and will be saved from their mistakes by technology sets the stage for immense environmental disasters and possibly our own extinction.  The greatest danger to humanity's future lies with such people who, through religious fervor and the all-too-common, pitifully inadequate, education in biology, spread their ignorance to each succeeding generation.  Richard A. Orr Fenton Eye For An Eye Isn't society lucky to have those of the ilk of Sept. 14 letter writer Alan Schneider and the Aug. 25 Commentary article author Debra Saunders? Herr Doktor Josef Mengele would have loved their ideas of punishment!  Why haven't we thought of all this before? Imagine: cutting off, at the knee, the legs of repeat drunk driving offenders. Removing the arms, at the shoulders, of those who continue to take what isn't theirs, ''de-tongueing'' those who speak in opposition to what we believe or extracting the eyes of porn readers. The possibilities are endless.  As long as we're at it, why not lobotomies for Schneider and those who share his mentality?  Mark Huneke St. Louis


Load-Date: October 25, 1993


End of Document


People in Business
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 30, 2016 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. B2
Length: 184 words
Body


Legal Services of Eastern Missouri named Ann McKee as controller.
BSR Services hired Jeff Kemp as team member relations manager.
Armstrong Teasdale added M. Courtney Jackson and Michael H. Longmeyer to its partnership.
Benjamin F. Edwards & Co. added the following: Kevin Sullivan and Gregory J. Simpson as managing directors and Philip Metzger as vice president.
Psychological Associates named Kristi Addis and Melissa Cynova to the firm's operations team.
Financial advisers Harold "Mac" MacFarland and Tadd Hicks joined Raymond James & Associates.
St. Anthony's Medical Center named Russ Schroeder as chief nursing officer.
Benson Hill Biosystems hired Paul Skroch as vice president of data science and platform engineering.
Office Essentials added Ken Koboldt as managed print specialist and Shawn Menke as director of sales.
Powers Insurance and Benefits hired Ryan Rizzo as controller.
Bryan Cave LLP promoted Jill Doverspike Giorgio and Emma C. Harty to counsel.
NewGround appointed Alexander Brockman as vice president of business development.
Sarah Miller was promoted to assistant estimator at S.M. Wilson & Co.

Graphic

 
 Armstrong Teasdale added Michael H. Longmeyer to its partnership.  NewGround appointed Alexander Brockman as vice president of business development.  Sarah Miller was promoted to assistant estimator at S.M. Wilson & Co.  Office Essentials added Shawn Menke as director of sales.  Office Essentials added Ken Koboldt as managed print specialist.  Powers Insurance and Benefits hired Ryan Rizzo as controller.  St. Anthony's Medical Center named Russ Schroeder as chief nursing officer.  Psychological Associates added Melissa Cynova to the firm's operations team.  Armstrong Teasdale added M. Courtney Jackson to its partnership.  Psychological Associates added Kristi Addis to the firm's operations team.  BSR Services hired Jeff Kemp as team member relations manager.  Legal Services of Eastern Missouri named Ann McKee as controller. 

Load-Date: January 3, 2017


End of Document


Editorial: Once again, Trump pushes greenhouse rollbacks even industry doesn't want.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 3, 2019 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2019 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A8
Length: 520 words
Byline:  By the Editorial Board 
Body


Once again, the Trump administration is reversing Obama-era greenhouse-gas regulations. This time, it's the rules regarding methane released by the fossil-fuel industry, a major contributor to global warming. It's part of a pattern with this White House that is starting to look not just like capitulation to industry but the enthusiastic sabotage of important environmental standards for sabotage's sake. As always, President Donald Trump has his backward-looking base foremost in his mind.
How else to explain that - once again - the administration is pursuing this retrograde rollback despite the fact that major players in the industry don't want it? It's a replay of the situation with automakers, some of which are fighting the administration's attempts to gut auto emissions standards.
Yet the administration is pushing ahead with both measures anyway, apparently eager to show Trump's most ideologically obstinate fans just how environmentally irresponsible he can be.
Greenhouse gases released by industry, including methane, trap reflected solar heat in the atmosphere, preventing it from drifting back into space, pushing up the planet's surface and water temperatures.
The delusions of climate-change deniers like Trump notwithstanding, the science, data and real-world effects are clear: Industrialization has pumped unprecedented amounts of greenhouse gas into the atmosphere, spawning unprecedented global temperatures. Measurable effects already include melting arctic ice, rising sea levels, droughts and unstable weather patterns. Scientists around the world overwhelmingly agree that without major reductions in greenhouse gases, these events will reach crisis proportions in this century.
Former President Barack Obama joined most responsible world leaders in working to reduce those emissions with industry restrictions. Trump's efforts to undo that progress has at times looked less like serious policy than environmental vandalism.
Several major automakers have infuriated Trump by deciding - based on business considerations and, we'd like to think, plain old corporate responsibility - to take a pass on the administration's offer of lower emissions standards.
Now, Exxon, Shell and BP are urging Trump to keep current methane gas standards in place instead of rolling them back, as the administration is trying to do. "We believe sound environmental policies are foundational to the vital role natural gas can play," Shell said in a statement. "Despite the administration's proposal to no longer regulate methane, Shell's U.S. assets will continue to contribute to that global target."
Perhaps Trump will soon tweet-fume that those fossil-fuel companies are being too environmentally responsible, as he essentially complained about the automakers.
What a strange place Trump and his reactionary fans have brought us to, with anti-environmentalism so extreme that even industry recoils from it. As an official with the Environmental Defense Fund put it, these rollbacks aren't science-based decisions, but "an ideological reaction to regulation." Which is exactly the wrong way to make environmental policy.

Graphic

 
 Pumpjacks work in a field near Lovington, N.M. The Trump administration is proposing a rule change to roll back requirements on detecting and plugging methane leaks at oil and gas facilities.(AP Photo/Charlie Riedel) 

Load-Date: September 3, 2019


End of Document


KANSAS ELECTION SPELLS END TO SCHOOL STANDARDS PLAYING DOWN EVOLUTION;
CONSERVATIVE MEMBERS OF STATE BOARD ARE DEFEATED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 3, 2000, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A5
Length: 439 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: TOPEKA, KAN.EVOLUTION; SCIENCE; CREATIONISM; EDUCATION; PRIMARY; ELECTION CANDIDATES
Body


The hotly debated science standards that play down evolution for Kansas public school students are likely to be overturned as a result of the defeat of three conservatives for seats on the State Board of Education.
Two incumbents and a candidate who support the state's newly adopted science standards were defeated in Republican primaries Tuesday.
The winning moderate Republicans and the Democrats they face in November elections say they want to scrap the new guidelines when the new board starts work in January. The guidelines were adopted last year on a 6-4 vote.
"We expect to have a very busy January," said Sue Gamble, who defeated incumbent Linda Holloway. "This has been a bone of contention among all of us as we've talked over the past several months."
Steve Abrams, a conservative who helped write the new standards, said he expected the new board to reject them. He also said he could not explain why he was the only incumbent to survive the primary.
Critics argued that the board's decision to play down evolution in science classes made the state look backward; proponents said it lets local school districts decide what to teach.
The standards also provide the basis for statewide student assessment tests in science, which are scheduled to be introduced next spring.
Gamble said she was unsure what would happen to the new tests. She said one option would be to keep using the current tests, which include questions on evolution, until new ones are developed.
Gamble and other moderates hope to adopt a version of the standards that was written by a committee of 27 science educators. The board did not vote on those standards, which called evolution by natural selection "a broad, unifying theoretical framework in biology."
Abrams said that that description overstated the significance of evolution, which he views as a flawed theory.
 
"The science data does not support what they said," Abrams said.
Holloway, the board's chairwoman when it approved the standards, spent $ 35,000 on TV ads defending that decision. She said before the election that such high-profile campaigning, unprecedented for board races, was necessary to combat negative publicity.
The board's decision generated unprecedented campaign contributions and drew international attention. On Wednesday, national groups that had criticized the board's action lauded the primary results.
"This is a victory for Kansas children, who should not be deprived of one of the most important cornerstones of modern science," said Ralph Neas , president of People for the American Way. "Teaching biology without evolution is like teaching civics without the Constitution."

Graphic

 
PHOTO Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Linda Holloway, a member of the Kansas State Board of Education, casts her vote in the primary elections Tuesday in Shawnee. Holloway, ousted in the election, was criticized for her role in a decision to de-emphasize evolution in science teaching.

Load-Date: August 3, 2000


End of Document


Rodney Davis: Don't succumb to us-versus-them pandemic mentality
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 16, 2020 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A17
Length: 744 words
Byline:  By Rodney Davis  
Body


On Aug. 5, I tested positive for COVID-19. Like many Americans, I didn't think it would happen to me. I've followed the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines as best I could. My wife is a nurse and a cancer survivor, which makes her more vulnerable if she were to get sick. My wife's health care job and health history combined with the public interaction my job as a member of Congress requires are some of the reasons I've taken the pandemic seriously.
The day of my positive test started out like any other. I felt fine, but during my twice daily temperature check every morning and evening, my temperature was elevated at 99 degrees. Data and science show that asymptomatic carriers are significant contributors to spreading the virus, so I considered the temperature check as an extra precaution and an easy part of a daily routine.
Following the elevated temperature, my wife and I drove to receive a COVID-19 test and later got a call that I tested positive. My wife tested negative and our three college-age children tested negative later in the week, as well as my staff. Multiple doctors told me that I most likely got sick somewhere here in central Illinois 48 hours before my high temperature registered. The truth is, like most Americans who have been stricken, I have no idea where, or from whom, I contracted the virus.
The two days before my positive test, our office was holding our open office hours and touring small businesses. I believe that even in a pandemic, it's important for me to be accessible to the constituents I serve. If we expect our front-line workers to go to work every day, elected officials should do the same. At those meetings and events, we followed all of the guidelines at all times. We held meetings in large, open spaces, wore face masks and social distanced.
Once you test positive, the CDC recommends you contact anyone considered at-risk within the past 48 hours, primarily those you've been in close contact with indoors for periods of longer than 15 minutes. My staff and I went about contacting anyone who would be considered at-risk and even those who weren't, just to be safe. Contact tracing is an important part of containing the spread since someone may be positive and not know it.
I am blessed that my symptoms have been relatively mild compared to tens of thousands of Americans who have suffered from this virus. I had a mild fever and lost my sense of taste and smell, though I've had no major health complications.
After consulting multiple doctors and CDC guidelines, I'm confident my quarantine will end soon as long as I don't exhibit any symptoms. I will continue to do my best to follow CDC guidelines after I recover. With all the misinformation out there, it's important we listen to the medical experts. The medical community is learning more about this virus every day, and I feel confident we will prevail.
Meanwhile, I'm quarantining and working from my back porch as much as possible so I can maintain proper social distance from my wife. When we are both inside our home, we wear masks to protect her.
Americans are becoming increasingly agitated as "virus fatigue" settles in. Being confined to my house has me stir crazy. It's important that as policymakers we remember this, and while combating the virus through health measures, we balance it with efforts to keep Americans employed and allow for some semblance of life. Not every American has the ability to work from home. Long-term effects of isolation are real and can lead to serious mental health problems, including addiction to drugs and alcohol or even suicide, not to mention the affects on our children.
Too often in times of crisis we retreat to our partisan corners and develop an us-versus-them mentality. We aren't going to get through this with government mandates, finger-pointing, or shaming our fellow citizens. My whole experience has reinforced the need to focus on our personal responsibility to our neighbors and our communities.
Too many Americans have to wait too long for tests, and that's unacceptable. States and the federal government should be doing everything they can to expand diagnostic and antibody testing. That's how we will stay ahead of this virus.
We all must do our part. That's what it will take to protect the public health, get our economy going again, and get us through this pandemic.
Republican Rep. Rodney Davis of Taylorville represents Illinois congressional District 13 in Congress.

Graphic

 
 Rep. Rodney Davis, R-Taylorville.Photo by Hillary Levin, hlevin@post-dispatch.com 

Load-Date: August 17, 2020


End of Document


MORNING BRIEFING
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 17, 2000, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS, Pg. C2; Morning Briefing Column
Length: 699 words
Byline: From Bloomberg News, Associated Press And Post-DispatchLBIZ; RECOGNITION; MANAGEMENT; PUBLICATION; STOCK; GAS PIPES; AIRLINE INDUSTRY; LABOR PROBLEMS; CONTRACT; TELECOMMUNICATIONS; STRIKE; COMPUTER COMPANY; DIVERSIFICATION; BIOTECHNOLOGY; GENETIC ENGINEERING
Body

 
Best-managed list includes Emerson for a fifth year
For the fifth year in a row, Emerson Electric Co. has been ranked in IndustryWeek magazine as one of the 100 best-managed companies in the world. Only 35 other companies have won such recognition for five years in a row.
Candidates for the honor come from the IndustryWeek 1,000, a list of the world's largest publicly held manufacturers. With $ 14.3 billion in revenue, Emerson is the largest public company based in St. Louis.
IndustryWeek said the best-managed companies set the standard in innovation, leadership, globalization, alliances and partnerships, employee benefits and education, and community involvement.
Details will be in the Aug. 21 issue of IndustryWeek, or go to www.industryweek.com/iwinprint/bestmanaged. 
 
Maverick Tube shares will be listed on NYSE
 
Maverick Tube Corp. is moving to the Big Board.
The Chesterfield-based company will move to the New York Stock Exchange from Nasdaq on Sept. 25. That's a few days after its purchase of Prudential Steel Ltd. of Calgary, Alberta, is expected to close. The deal will make Maverick No. 1 in North America in welded pipes and tubes used in natural gas and oil wells and in transporting the fuel across country.
 
The stock's new ticker will be MVK. On Nasdaq, the ticker is MAVK.
 
TWA's Aviators can earn miles by shopping now
Trans World Airlines has announced a new shopping program for members of its Aviators frequent-flier program. Fliers making purchases through the Aviators ShopSmart program can earn additional frequent-flier miles.
Through a partnership with San Francisco-based Netcentives Inc., Aviator members can earn up to five miles for each dollar charged in the program. Some participating merchants include Eddie Bauer, Spiegel, the Sharper Image and Service Merchandise.
 
United Airlines cancels 96 more flights
UAL Corp.'s United Airlines canceled 96 more flights Wednesday, even as the world's largest carrier took out ads in major U.S. newspapers acknowledging criticism of recent flight disruptions.
The 96 worldwide cancellations were in addition to the airline's 3 percent schedule reduction through October as a result of operational problems United says are linked to labor contract negotiations. The airline normally operates 2,400 flights worldwide.
The Chicago-based carrier has canceled thousands of flights since mid-April, partly because of an increase in pilots declining to fly overtime and calling in sick. The airline said last week that it's spending $ 100 million to improve service while also tripling the number of spare aircraft and adding 1,300 pilots this year.
In addition to the pilot shortage, the airline company in a recent letter to employees blamed some of the increased cancellations on actions by members of the Machinists union. UAL is in contract negotiations with both unions.
 
Verizon unions will leave talks if deadline passes
Union representatives of striking Verizon Communications workers will leave the contract talks if there's no agreement by midnight tonight, said officials of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers and the Communications Workers of America.
 
The IBEW represents about 15,000 striking Verizon workers.
Negotiators for Communications Workers of America members in New York plan to do the same if there isn't significant movement on important issues, said spokeswoman Candice Johnson. The CWA represents some 72,000 striking employees.
About 87,000 Verizon workers walked out 11 days ago. The No. 1 U.S. local-telephone service company has been talking with union officials since June. The unions are pressing the company to reduce overtime and workplace stress, and to limit the relocation of jobs around the country.
 
IBM pumps $ 100 million into new life sciences unit
International Business Machines Corp. is spending $ 100 million over three years to develop new products to process and interpret the human genetic code and other life science data. IBM also has formed a life sciences unit to sell data management and storage and Internet commerce to biotech and drug companies. The company projects industry sales for life science products and software will more than double to $ 9 billion by 2003.

Load-Date: August 17, 2000


End of Document


NATION / WORLD BRIEFS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 6, 1998, Saturday, THREE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. 2, NATION / WORLD BRIEFS
Length: 1465 words
Byline: From News Services
Body

 
HOUSTON
 
Shuttle system failure thwarts key experiment
Space shuttle Discovery's astronauts struggled without success Friday to fix a failed communication link that is hampering a critical science experiment, and NASA all but declared the transmitting system dead. The science experiment involved an effort to find and measure antimatter, an elusive form of matter theorized to exist in the universe. Antimatter has the opposite electrical charge of known matter.
Astronaut Andrew Thomas, meanwhile, enjoyed his first full day back aboard a U.S. spaceship after more than four months on Mir. "I'm really thrilled to see these guys here," he said.
As Thomas lugged his belongings from the Russian space station into Discovery, three of his crewmates spent more than 1 1/2 hours trying to fix the shuttle's high-speed data transmission system. Since blasting into orbit Tuesday, Discovery has been unable to send back any TV images or high-speed science data.
 
WASHINGTON
 
Judge sets trial date in Espy corruption case
A federal judge has set an Oct. 1 trial date for former Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy, who is charged with accepting $ 35,000 in gratuities from companies regulated by the Agriculture Department.
The date was set by U.S. District Judge Ricardo Urbina after a status conference Thursday even though an appeals court is still considering whether to reinstate four charges that were thrown out against Espy.
Espy, who has pleaded innocent, is charged with 35 counts of taking illegal gifts, including travel, sports tickets and luggage.
 
VIRGINIA
 
Federal rules hamper disposal of dead sea turtles
Dead sea turtles are washing up and rotting on Virginia beaches, and homeowners who are gagging because of the stench can't touch the carcasses. Sea turtles are protected by the federal Endangered Species Act, which prohibits anyone from handling them - dead or alive - without a permit.
In Virginia, the Virginia Institute of Marine Science in Gloucester Point has permits but says it no longer has the money to remove dead sea turtles, which can weigh anywhere from 20 pounds to 800 pounds.
"The smell is so bad right now, you can smell it all over the neighborhood," Brenda Bowman, whose neighbors have a rotting turtle on their beach on the western shore of the Chesapeake Bay, said Friday.
 
WASHINGTON
 
U.S. halts tests of drug for preventing diabetes
The U.S. National Institutes of Health said Friday it had stopped tests of a new diabetes drug, troglitazone, in trials aimed at preventing diabetes in people considered at high risk.
The agency said the tests were stopped after some people taking the drug developed liver failure and three died. The drug, sold under the brand name Rezulin in the United States by Warner-Lambert Co's Parke-Davis unit, went on the market last year and was the first new drug developed in years for treating diabetes in years.
But the NIH said patients now taking the drug should continue taking it. Company spokesman Stephen Mock said that the deaths were rare and that patients shouldn't panic in the wake of NIH's action. In December, the federal Food and Drug Administration told doctors to monitor patients taking Rezulin following liver failures and deaths associated with the drug.
 
WORLD
 
SOUTH AFRICA
 
Tutu blames white leaders for apartheid-era abuses
Archbishop Desmond Tutu told former President P.W. Botha's contempt trial in George, South Africa, on Friday that apartheid-era human rights abuses were ordered from on top and were not just the work of a few bad apples. Tutu was angered by Botha's defense argument that only rogue junior officers were involved in apartheid killings.
"I am deeply distressed," he told Botha's lawyer, Lappe Laubscher. "How many bad apples are you going to concede? It wasn't just a small, insignificant group. It was a group which could sow the most awful mayhem because of who they were."
Tutu was testifying at Botha's trial as head of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. Botha is challenging the legality of the commission, which is conducting South Africa's official inquiry into atrocities committed by those seeking to protect white minority rule or to fight it. Botha, 82, is on trial for contempt after he ignored three subpoenas to testify before the panel.
 
SRI LANKA
 
Government censors news on its war against rebels
Sri Lanka imposed censorship on news reports of the war between government troops and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam rebels, the government said in a statement issued Friday in Colombo.
The statement said print and electronic media were barred from carrying news about operations by the military, police and the special task force. They also are forbidden to report the deployment of troops and naval vessels and aircraft or "any statement pertaining to the official conduct or the performance of the head or any member of any of the armed forces or the police force," the defense ministry statement said.
The statement did not say why the censorship, which applies to both local and foreign media, was being imposed. The government last imposed censorship in September 1995 because of what it said was irresponsible reporting on the war by part of the news media.
 
CHINA
 
Vatican's Internet service riles Chinese government
China warned the Vatican on Friday not to meddle in its internal affairs in a sharp response to the launch of a Chinese-language service on the Internet by the Holy See.
"China hopes the Vatican will not use media and the Internet to interfere in China's internal affairs, including China's religious affairs," a Foreign Ministry spokeswoman said by telephone in Beijing. She declined to comment further. The Vatican news agency Fides said Thursday that its new Internet service was aimed at spreading news about the Roman Catholic Church in China.
About 4 million Chinese worship through China's state-sponsored Catholic Church, but twice that number are estimated to hold allegiance to the pope and worship in underground churches. The pope has often appealed to Chinese authorities to grant its people more religious freedom. Human rights groups say Beijing continues to clamp down on worship outside official religious circles.
 
RUSSIA
 
Nuclear disarmament treaty gets push in parliament
The Russian government pressed ahead on Friday with a new campaign to encourage reluctant parliamentarians to ratify the long-delayed START II nuclear disarmament treaty. The government said it did not know when the document might be approved but said it was was encouraged that Washington appeared to have become less vocal about making ratification a condition of a summit between the U.S. and Russian presidents.
Under the treaty, signed in 1993 and already ratified by the United States, Moscow and Washington would reduce their deployed nuclear warheads from 6,000 each to no more than 3,500 by 2007. The treaty will pave the way for a START III treaty on more cuts.
The Duma, where the Communists are the biggest party, is worried about the costs of destroying the weapons and fears the United States is planning to break out of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty by building new missile defense systems. Washington denies this.
 
SPAIN
 
Woman is killed in police raid aimed at Basque separatists
A woman suspected of belonging to the guerrilla group ETA was killed on Friday in a shootout with police during a raid on a separatist hideout in Spain's Basque country, officials said.
Another suspect was injured when he jumped from a second-floor window, and a police officer was shot in the arm, authorities said. Fourteen people with alleged links to ETA were arrested before dawn across the Basque region.
The woman, identified as Ignacia Ceberio, 30, was killed when she opened fire on police who burst into an apartment in the town of Guernica, the Basque regional interior ministry said. Police alleged she was a member of ETA, which has killed more than 800 people in a 30-year fight for an independent Basque homeland. The Interior Ministry said in a statement that Friday's raids "prevented a new wave of large-scale attacks which was due to begin soon."
 
UNITED NATIONS
 
Annan calls Serb actions in Kosovo 'atrocities'
Secretary-General Kofi Annan condemned on Friday the "atrocities committed by Serbian forces" in Kosovo as he and Security Council members expressed concern over mounting violence toward ethnic Albanians in the Serbian province. A statement issued by a U.N. spokesman said Annan "reiterates in the strongest possible terms his condemnation of the atrocities committed by Serbian military and paramilitary forces."
Annan said he was encouraged by NATO's resolve to prevent a further escalation of the fighting, and he again called for a negotiated settlement that would facilitate a peaceful and democratic future for the people of Kosovo.

Graphic

 
PHOTO Photo from The Associated Press - A balloonist's chase crew is silhouetted as its members check a balloon for damage during inflation. They were taking part in the Wild Rogue Balloon Festival Friday in Grants Pass, Ore.

Load-Date: June 6, 1998


End of Document


TI FACES HAND-HELD CHALLENGE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 12, 2002 Wednesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. C1; PROFILE; TEXAS INSTRUMENTS; GRAPHING CALCULATORS; PDA COMPETITION;
Length: 771 words
Byline: David Koenig The Associated Press
Dateline: GRAND PRAIRIE, TEXAS
Body


* Texas Instruments' dominance in graphing calculators gets tested by new software that lets computers do the same work and a lot more.
As a teacher diagrammed an ellipse on the chalkboard, Austin Jarvis entered equations into a graphing calculator.
With a few more taps at the tiny keypad, Jarvis reproduced the shape of a squished circle on his hand-held device.
"When you have circles and ellipses, there is no way you'd be able to do this without a calculator," said Jarvis, a senior in high school. "It helps us visualize what we're doing."
U.S. students have been using graphing calculators for more than a decade, and Texas Instruments accounts for more than 80 percent of school sales, according to the NPD Intelect market-research firm.
Texas Instruments, based in Dallas, worries no longer about rival calculator companies cutting into the sales. But after a decade of producing more powerful machines, TI faces what might become a more serious challenge: software that turns hand-held computers into graphing calculators.
"It's simpler to use, and you gain the full power of a hand-held computer rather than carrying around a calculator that is only used in math class," said Elia Friedman, chief executive of Infinity Softworks Inc. in Beaverton, Ore.
Infinity makes the software of a graphing plug-in, which Friedman calls the "TI killer," for Palm Inc. digital assistants.
How is TI responding? It's making calculators more like hand-helds.
The company's 1.5-megabyte TI-83 Silver Edition, which sells for about $130, comes with an address book and an organizer, with enough memory to hold nearly 100 programs, from spreadsheets to the periodic table of elements.
Like a hand-held, data on high-end TI calculators can be transferred to a personal computer using USB or serial connections.
Meanwhile, the company is beta-testing a system to network calculators with the teacher's computer so student keystrokes could be monitored.
"We've gone far beyond the "C-word" - calculators - into computerlike technology," said Richard Schaar, president of TI's education business.
TI's calculators enjoy a price advantage: The popular TI-83 models typically sell for $95 to $130, versus $200 for a Palm m105 with Infinity's software.
Nelson Heller, who publishes an education-technology newsletter, expects a stiff challenge from personal digital assistants.
"Both of them are getting better," Heller said.
PDAs are being embraced by many school districts, where they're used for tasks ranging from collecting data in science classes to managing security at football games.
Steven Glyer, director of education technology for the Newport-Mesa Unified School District in southern California, said that while PDAs are still short on school applications, they have become affordable and that new software arrives each year.
PDAs have had no discernible effect on TI's sales.
Though calculators account for just 1 percent of the company's sales - most of the rest comes from making chips for cell phones and other devices - the education division set a quarterly record with $179 million in sales last fall, and it's coming off its best first quarter in history.
Even the companies taking aim at TI acknowledge that it won't be easy to knock off the Texas giant, which has sold more than 20 million graphing calculators since 1990.
The company has cultivated math teachers for more than a decade, invo lving them in design decisions, offering training and helping to fund their groups.
Hand-held makers say PDAs can do even more, such as sending and receiving e-mail as well as handling sound and image files in the newer, more expensive models.
"Kids are going to bring (PDAs) in," said Jolaine Harbour, director of education marketing for Palm, based in Santa Clara, Calif. "I'm waiting for moms to say: 'Wait, I already bought a Palm. Why do I have to buy a calculator too?'"
= = = =
TI-83 Silver Edition
Primary use: Graphing calculator. Price: $130.
What makes it more like a hand-held: It has added address book and organizer features, with enough memory to hold nearly 100 programs, from spreadsheets to the periodic table of elements. Like a hand-held, data on higher-end TI calculators can be transferred to a personal computer using USB or serial connections.
Palm m105 hand-held
Primary use: Datebook, address book, e-mail (with added application).
Price: $200.
What makes it more like a graphing calculator: A plug-in made by Infinity gives it graphing capabilities.
* In addition, PDAs are being embraced by many school districts, where they're used for tasks ranging from collecting data in science classes to managing security at football games.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; (1) Photo - TI-83 Silver Edition calculator; (2) Photo - Palm m105 hand-held PDA

Load-Date: June 19, 2002


End of Document


NEW SCIENCE CURRICULUM AIMS TO GIVE BETTER UNDERSTANDING 'OF BIG PICTURE'
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 28, 1991, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7
Length: 386 words
Byline: Janet Edwards Post-Dispatch Sp ecial Correspondent
Body


Middle-school students in the Clayton School District always have been exposedto a good science curriculum, but there has been little direction or long-range focus in the teaching, says Bob Dwyer, science subject manager for the district.  Dwyer reported to the School Board recently that the district's science program had been revamped completely this past summer.  ''We start in sixth grade building basic skills, and we continue to build through the following grades,'' Dwyer said in an interview. ''In seventh grade, students learn to use the tools, such as rulers, scales and graduated cylinders, and by the time they leave in eighth grade they have a much greater understanding of the big science picture.'' Board members were shown experiments, maps, video and computer components, books and completed student projects from the program.  The new curriculum requires students to become much more involved in experiments, observations, recording lab results and interpreting data than before, science teachers said.  ''A student can fail to write up a lab report, but he can't fail to feel the heat of compost,'' said Jim Gender, eighth-grade teacher.  The approach is interdisciplinary and stresses teamwork. Field trips are common, Dwyer said. Along with the St. Louis Zoo, the Missouri Botanical Garden and the St. Louis Science Center, students also may explore a pond community, visit professional scientists at work, gather first-hand knowledge of Mississippi River ecology and study ancient neighbors in Cahokia.  Eighth-graders are invited to complete an oceanography study with a week-long trip to a marine biological station at Wallops Island, Va.
Classroom work includes making models of cells or volcanoes and earthquakes, growing plants, using computer simulations and creating a scale model of the solar system.  ''Students learn about their dependence upon, and their obligation to, the planet and to each other,'' Gender said. ''Classroom teachers are facilitators - they are not on center stage.'' Dwyer noted that the program is still evolving. For instance, options for high and low achievers are still being developed.  The board heard a similar report from the elementary school science coordinators last summer. The middle school program provides a consistent extension of that curriculum.


Load-Date: October 13, 1993


End of Document


Vdigest 11-23-20
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 23, 2020 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 1066 words
Body


ILLINOIS - Cases top 10,000 again: State public health officials reported more than 10,000 new cases of COVID-19 on Sunday for the fourth consecutive day.
The last time the daily count dipped below 10,000 was Wednesday when it was 8,922, according to the Illinois Department of Public Health.
The agency, which reported 10,012 cases Sunday, also reported 76 additional deaths. Since the beginning of the pandemic 11,506 people have died from COVID-19.
The total number of cases in Illinois is 656,298. More than 92,000 tests have been reported in the past 24 hours, according to state officials.
In Missouri, there were 2,817 people hospitalized with the coronavirus as of Thursday, with 646 of those in intensive care units and 336 on ventilators.
New hospital admissions of coronavirus patients in the St. Louis region decreased from 152 to 101 on Sunday, though the data lagged two days, according to the St. Louis Metropolitan Pandemic Task Force.
The task force, which represents the area's four major hospital systems including BJC HealthCare, Mercy, SSM Health and St. Luke's, said Sunday that the seven-day moving average of hospitalizations has increased, from 828 on Saturday to 844 on Sunday. The average marks a record high.
In St. Louis there have been 11,743 cases of COVID-19 and 224 deaths, according to the city's health department.
There have been 46,357 cases in St. Louis County, and 944 deaths. The county's positivity rate is similar to the rest of the state - about 20% of COVID-19 tests administered come back positive.
St. Charles County has seen 19,632 total cases and 205 deaths, with an increase of 411 cases on Sunday. Confirmed cases have increased by 70% in the past two weeks compared with the two weeks prior, according to data provided by the county.
ST. LOUIS - Teachers union wants mandate: The union representing St. Louis teachers is calling for a statewide mask mandate, a proposal that also has the backing of Missouri's two largest teacher organizations.
The interim president of the American Federation of Teachers St. Louis Local 420, Ray Cummings, said in a statement late Monday that it's time for Republican Gov. Mike Parson "to follow science and the advice of health care professionals" in issuing a mask mandate.
Outside St. Louis, Missouri teachers are largely represented by the Missouri National Education Association or the Missouri State Teachers Association. Contacted Tuesday, MNEA spokesman Mark Jones said the union "certainly would support a statewide mask mandate."
MSTA spokesman Todd Fuller said the association supports following science and the recommendations of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
"With that in mind, MSTA would support a statewide mask mandate," Fuller said.
The Illinois Federation of Teachers asked Democratic Gov. J.B. Pritzker to close school buildings. IFT President Dan Montgomery also called on Pritzker and the state health department to "establish and enforce clear metrics for schools to guide them for any future closures, so that individual districts and school boards can ensure safety within their communities and create plans for executing remote learning or in-person instruction based on science and positivity rate data."
ST. LOUIS COUNTY - Saliva tests for schools: Students and staff in the Special School District of St. Louis County will receive saliva tests for COVID-19 through a program with Washington University.
Researchers at the medical school received a two-year, $5 million federal grant to provide 50,000 saliva tests to the district's six schools for students with special needs. The voluntary tests will be given weekly over the next year. Washington U. researchers helped develop the saliva test, which provides same-day results.
The researchers are also studying educational disparities during the pandemic among children with intellectual and developmental disabilities.
The grant is part of $500 million awarded by the National Institutes of Health to 32 medical centers through the Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics-Underserved Populations.
ILLINOIS - Relief deadline approaches: Gov. J.B. Pritzker's administration is reminding local government officials of a Dec. 1 deadline to submit applications for federal relief from the coronavirus pandemic.
Congress approved so-called Local CURE funds as part of a COVID-19 relief package last spring. The money must be spent by Dec. 30.
The Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity reports that it has initiated the process with the 1,400 eligible governments but many have yet to complete required steps.
DCEO said 503 local governments have received or will receive a total of $112 million thus far. But more than 400 government bodies are still eligible and have not completed applications.
Eligible costs incurred between March 1 and Dec. 30 include payrolls for public health and public safety, COVID-19 testing and contact tracing, emergency medical expenses, and public health spending necessary to comply with government orders.
Money not spent by year's end is returned to the federal government.
KANSAS CITY - Firefighter, paramedic die from virus: Two members of the Kansas City Fire Department died this weekend after battling the coronavirus.
A communications specialist and paramedic who worked for the department, Scott Davidson, 45, died Sunday, according to the International Association of Fire Fighters Local 42. A day earlier, city officials said fire Captain Robert "Bobby" Rocha died after battling COVID-19 for several weeks.
Rocha, 60, began at the fire department in 1991, department spokesman Jason Spreitzer said.
"His passing represents a personal loss to all of us who knew him. I cherish both his friendship and professionalism," Fire Chief Donna Lake said.
The firefighters union said three members of the Kansas City Fire Department have now died with the coronavirus. The union said the deaths show that the virus has affected all divisions of the fire department. In March, Kansas City Fire Department EMT Billy Birmingham was the first fire department employee to die from the virus.
Since the pandemic began, 176 members of the Kansas City Fire Department have tested positive for COVID-19, Spreitzer said. As of Saturday, 73 were still infected.
The city considers any fire department employee who contracts COVID-19 as having contracted it on the job, Spreitzer said.
From staff and wire reports

Load-Date: November 24, 2020


End of Document


SCIENCE WORLD SUFFERS SOME SETBACKS WITH LOSS OF HANDIWORK BY HARD-WORKING CREW;
 RESEARCH RANGED FROM CANCER SPREAD TO FIRE SUPPRESSION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 3, 2003 Monday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A5
Length: 588 words
Byline: Tina Hesman Of The Post-Dispatch
Body


Before the last mission of space shuttle Columbia ended in disaster Saturday, the crew collected data for 80 science experiments.
Those experiments included measurements of the astronauts' physical reactions to microgravity, tests that could lead to technology advancement, and Earth and space science experiments, according to NASA.
The astronauts grew prostrate cancer cells in the Bioreactor Demonstration System to learn more about how the cells invade bones. When cancer cells are grown in petri dishes on Earth, gravity flattens the cells, making them look like pancakes instead of tumors. In space, the lack of gravity allows the tumors to grow in three dimensions, more closely resembling the way they behave in the body. One sample, taken from a bone and prostate tumor, grew as large as a golf ball.
A variety of animals, including 13 rodents, and microorganisms flew aboard Columbia. One fish hatched while in orbit, and a silk moth emerged from its cocoon. The two animals and an international menagerie, including Australian spiders and carpenter bees from Liechtenstein, were subjects in a series of experiments designed by schoolchildren in the program known as STARS.
The astronauts grew flax seeds in a strong magnetic field while scientists on Earth monitored root growth. Other experiments investigated microgravity's effects on bone cells, yeast and bacteria.
Israeli astronaut Ilan Ramon observed dust storms and lightning for the Mediterranean Israeli Dust Experiment. The study, sponsored by the Israeli Space Agency and Tel Aviv University, was designed to examine the way fine particles, called aerosols, affect Earth's atmosphere.
Another experiment explored the way soil moves. Such data could be important in better understanding earthquakes.
The scientists conducted several experiments dealing with fire - both creating flame balls and dousing fires with fog-like mists of water. In one experiment, scientists created flame balls that alternately grew and shrank. It was the first time that such oscillating flame balls were ever observed.
The astronauts' hard work and dedication helped keep the Water Mist Fire Suppression Experiment, known as MIST, from fizzling out. The experiment, devised by scientists at the Center for Commercial Applicati ons of Combustion in Space at the Colorado School of Mines in Golden, uses fogs of water to extinguish fireballs in space. The scientists hope to use the data to develop more environmentally friendly ways to fight fires.
The equipment used to generate the fireballs malfunctioned before the Colorado team's scheduled experiment time. Astronauts Michael Anderson and Kalpana Chawla each gave up some of their personal time to make repairs to the equipment so the experiment could go forward, said David Petrick, one of the Colorado scientists. Chawla worked for five hours while scientists on the ground talked her through a procedure to bunch up a tube and stop a leak.
The Colorado scientists ignited and extinguished many of the fireballs from the ground and collected data from about 90 percent of the experiments, Petrick said. The scientists were waiting to collect two videotapes of their last experiments when Columbia landed, he said.
But the loss of data does not concern the Colorado team, Petrick said. T he team grieves for the loss of Columbia's crew.
"Sitting in Mission Control, we got to hear everything they said all week, and we just felt like they were our best friends. They worked so hard for us," Petrick said. "They're friends to all humanity."

Notes

SPACE SHUTTLE COLUMBIA; THE EXPERIMENTS; Reporter Tina Hesman; E-mail: thesman@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 314-340-8325  


Load-Date: February 3, 2003


End of Document


IMPLANTS WORK LIKE BLACK BOXES FOR HUMAN HEALTH
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 26, 2003 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS ; Pg. E8
Length: 838 words
Byline: Evan Ramstad The Associated Press
Dateline: ARDEN HILLS, MINN.
Body


* Advances in wireless and Internet technologies prompt medical companies to devise internal monitors that track organ functions, a breakthrough that doctors hope will help them to treat patients for less cost.
Data recorders in airplanes, called the black boxes, describe what went wrong after a disaster. Now, medical devices are emerging to act like a black box in the human body, except they're being used to prevent calamities.
Despite an early stage of development, a market is growing for implantable monitors, tiny devices that track the functions of a person's organs.
Five years ago, Medtronic Inc. released its first implantable monitor for people with mysterious fainting spells. It was a niche product for the giant company, known best for pacemakers and defibrillators. But it was a breakthrough, too, giving doctors far more data about effects on a fainting person's heart.
After two product generations, Medtronic has sold more than 25,000 of the 2-inch-long monitors, which weigh just a few grams. They're placed in a person's pectoral muscle, sometimes for just a few days, and they track heart activity in a 42-minute loop.
When a person recovers from a fainting incident, he stops the monitor. A doctor or a nurse can retrieve the data with a special radio receiver and then can restart the loop.
Other implants are being prepared to monitor blood pressure and heart rate, even inside the heart.
Robert Willoughby, 71, had one of the Medtronic monitors, known as Reveal, implanted in his chest nearly two years ago. He has myotonic dystrophy, a degenerative muscle condition often marked by an irregular heartbeat.
Willoughby, of Lapel, Ind., tried wearing an external electrocardiogram monitor to watch for unusual heart events, but the bulky device was a nuisance.
His implanted monitor is alert to store as many as 13 unusual events that occur during its loop. The information is downloaded in quarterly visits to his doctor.
A year after being implanted, Willoughby's device detected atrial fibrillation, an irregular heartbeat that can increase the risk of stroke. His doctor prescribed blood thinners.
"I don't mind dying suddenly from a heart attack," said Willoughby, a former General Motors tool-and-die worker. "I don't relish the idea of spending days in an infirm condition in a nursing home."
Better diagnosis
Immediately after Medtronic's device hit the market, the quality of diagnosis improved for people with infrequent fainting spells.
"A lot of the pull for the device came from patients, people who were frustrated, weren't able to drive, in disarray because fainting messed up their lives," co-inventor Brian Lee said.
The company's Reveal product seems only the start for implanted monitors.
The advance of wireless and Internet technologies allowed makers of other implants, such as pacemakers and defibrillators, to add monitoring features. In the past year, Medtronic and Biotronik Inc. began selling such products.
With the giant baby-boom generation nearing retirement, doctors hope that implantable monitors will help them to treat patients for less cost with fewer hospital visits.
Developers envision implantables that track pressure in the brains of spina bifida patients, who require fluid-draining shunts. For paraplegics who have lost sensitivity in their bladders, an implant could signal when it's time to urinate.
"Theoretically speaking, you can record many other things, such as blood pressure, blood sugar," said George Klein, a Canadian doctor who asked Medtronic to help with Reveal's development. "You've got a little device that's monitoring all kinds of biochemical and physiological information that can be transmitted to a medical center or to other devices in the body."
Data Sciences International Inc., a small company near Medtronic's headquarters in suburban Minneapolis, will start clinical trials next year of monitors that can track blood pressure inside the heart.
The company, which produced implantable monitors in lab animals, is racing with Medtronic to produce devices aimed at heart-failure patients.
Data Sciences made progress also with pressure-sensing and packaging technologies. Traditionally, implanted devices such as pacemakers were packaged in titanium. Data Sciences will rely on new ceramic material.
Its first product will have a base station that reads the radio signal sent from the implanted blood-pressure monitor. The device plugs into a phone jack and transmits data to the patient's doctor.
Medtronic's competing product, Chronicle, works in a similar fashion. It's in clinical trials.
To many doctors, implanted devices had represented a last resort. Few believed that the devices should be used for diagnosis, preferring to implant only devices that correct problems, such as pacemakers and defibrillators.
But the success of Reveal persuaded doctors to re-evaluate, said Susan Foote, a University of Minnesota professor who studies medical-technology policy. "The tools are safer, smaller, better, all these features that make them not as intrusive."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color Photo by the ASSOCIATED PRESS - Reveal Plus, an implantable heart monitor the size of a stick of gum, can store as many as 13 unusual events that occur during its loop.

Load-Date: January 28, 2003


End of Document


Cards' scouting director is homegrown Correa's goal is for the Redbirds to perform even better in the draft. CARDINALS BASEBALL
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 23, 2014 Tuesday
ONLINE EDITION


Copyright 2014 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS; Pg. B1
Length: 1420 words
Byline:  By Derrick Goold , dgoold@post-dispatch.com,  314-340-8285   
Body


The Cardinals had an opening for a data wrangler. Chris Correa, advancing on a graduate degree in psychology at the University of Michigan, had an offer.
He would gather and organize the amateur statistics the club wanted - searching for a player's OBP when he wasn't researching for his own Ph.D - in exchange for a promise. Correa told the Cardinals he would work for them, voluntarily, in exchange for an appointment.
He wanted a lunch with members of the front office.
That's it. One meal, conversation included.
"So," Correa said earlier this month, "the price was right."
Shortly after that promised lunch, Correa joined the Cardinals' baseball operations staff. About five years after his first paycheck from the team, Correa has been put in charge of one of the essential facets of modern big-league baseball, the draft. Correa was named the team's director of scouting earlier this month. He moves from overseeing a research and development staff to guiding at least 23 scouts as they canvass the amateur fields for the next Cardinals.
General manager John Mozeliak moved swiftly to replace Dan Kantrovitz, who oversaw the previous three drafts. As he does with the roster, Mozeliak preferred to promote from within.
"I didn't want to reinvent the wheel, frankly," Mozeliak said.
Ownership's mandate to improve a threadbare farm system a decade ago came with an investment in the draft and expansion of the use of statistics to shape decisions. The draft has thus become a thrust behind the Cardinals' run of postseason appearances. Eleven of the 16 players who appeared in Game 2 of the National League championship series, the one game the Cardinals won against San Francisco, were homegrown. The Cardinals' first picks in the 2012 and 2013 drafts - Michael Wacha and Marco Gonzales, respectively - reached the majors within 12 months of signing. A year after Wacha won the NLCS MVP, Gonzales had two wins in relief in this past October's NL division series.
The draft has to be the gift that keeps on giving.
"The way to think about this going forward is I'm not interested in replicating our past success," Correa said. "I'm interesting in getting better. We're going to be relentless in trying to find new innovations and new ways to improve our process. We've started that already."
Correa declined to go into specifics, but the importance of finding or maintaining an edge in the draft has already been underscored this winter.
Major League Baseball has kept a frenetic pace this month. The Chicago Cubs have accelerated their draft-laced rebuilding and spent handsomely on pitching. The Los Angeles Dodgers' new front office has overhauled the roster. And the San Diego Padres have, well, gone berserker. Within 48 hours last week, new Padres general manager A.J. Preller orchestrated the completion of five deals involving 25 players.
At the center of Preller's transaction tempest was a collection of recent draft picks. Of the 14 players the Padres traded in separate deals for Matt Kemp, Justin Upton and Wil Myers, five were recent first-round picks. Seven of the players the Padres traded were top 30 prospects, according to Baseball America's rankings entering the 2014 season. That's the underlying draw of such young players: not just talent, but cost control.
The Cardinals, likewise, have dipped into their draft stock for short-term help.
Entering the 2011 season - a year that ended with a World Series championship - Baseball America's top 10 prospects for the Cardinals included Shelby Miller (No. 1), Tyrell Jenkins (4), Allen Craig (5) and Joe Kelly (10). All four have been traded since July. Those moves, coupled with the graduation of prospects Wacha, Gonzales, Kolten Wong and Carlos Martinez to the majors, revealed a gap in the Cardinals' depth chart. Reinforcements are needed. With the exception of a few players, like Stephen Piscotty, the next generation of standout young players is just now approaching Class AA.
The wave after that - well, that's where the draft comes in.
"We're in a great spot," Correa said during a break in his appointments at the winter meetings in San Diego. "We've got the competitive balance pick. We've got an extra third-round pick. We've got five picks in the first three rounds. That gives us a lot of flexibility to acquire a lot of talent."
Correa, 34, is the third Cardinals director of scouting in the previous five years. He follows Kantrovitz, who is now an assistant general manager in Oakland, and Jeff Luhnow, who is the GM in Houston.
Correa grew up in southern New Hampshire, his fondness for baseball sparked at Fenway Park, though he wasn't a Red Sox fan. He and his father had front row seats in Fenway's right field, where Correa became fascinated by the opposing Twins' jovial right fielder, Kirby Puckett. He became "a Twins fan in New England." Correa studied cognitive science at Hampshire College, received a masters in psychology from the University of Illinois and was a doctoral candidate at Michigan when he found an opening in baseball.
Correa's first trip to St. Louis came when he was invited for lunch. Front office members took him to J. Buck's, the Cardinals' go-to place for interviews. Correa remembers talking to them about whether playing catcher would reduce minor-leaguer Steven Hill's offensive potential.
"I wanted to get to know them," he said, "and understand baseball better."
Correa's first role with the Cardinals was collecting data from Division I to Division III college baseball and cross-stitching that with the scouting evaluations the Cardinals had. This was part of an early system then known as STOUT that the Cardinals have since improved. As he joined the front office, officially, he worked on the team's algorithms and expanded their evaluations.
Correa had an open invitation to watch games from the general manager's box at Busch Stadium but instead spent "thousands of hours" in Section 150, where the scouts sit. He identified mentors in Mike Roberts and Mike Jorgensen, two venerable scouting voices in the organization. In grad school, Correa would take his textbook studies and apply them to baseball, and now in baseball he was able to utilize those "data science skills" - but with a sharpened view of player evaluation.
"I think what I learned there that helps me here is how to conduct empirical research and how to think critically about it," Correa said. "And what that means for applying it to day-to-day decisions."
Compared to when the Cardinals began their emphasis on the draft in 2005, baseball's June draft has become more intricate, limiting teams' power of the purse. There is now a spending limit on the total bonuses for players drafted in the first 10 rounds. In 2012 and 2013, the Cardinals outspent that bonus cap by 4 percent and paid a penalty. This past summer, the Cardinals failed to sign their third-round pick, reducing overall spending and falling short of the cap. They have an extra third-round pick in 2015 as a result - and the increase in their bonus purse. That may be even more valuable.
Where teams are looking for edges now in the draft is accumulating picks but also strategizing how to spend their bonus money. The Cardinals gave 34th overall pick Jack Flaherty a higher bonus ($2 million) than their first pick, Luke Weaver, and had to shape their picks around that spending. Teams will also wait to draft talent outside of the first 10 rounds where the hit on the bonus pool is less. Correa will orchestrate that strategy. Over the past few years, the Cardinals also have tried to better understand, through interviews and observation, the makeup of players who excel - how they deal with failure, what traits allow a player to thrive at a higher level. There is, of course, a psychology study aspect there, an area Correa knows well.
"Teams that have a better handle on that have an advantage," he said.
Correa spent time during the winter meetings talking with agents to start fostering the relationships he'll need to gauge signing bonuses this summer. He also conducted interviews for an open area scout position.
Now, people want lunch with him.
"We have to have high expectations for the draft," Correa said. "There's a big-leaguer in every draft round; we just have to find him. … We have more than 1,000 guys on our draft board, and I think the big thing for us is to come up with disciplined decision-making processes that are driven by lessons we've had in history. That way we make sure that we have the right names floating to the top of our list for each round."

Graphic

 
 Chris Correa, St. Louis Cardinals, Director of scouting.  St. Louis Cardinals outfielder Stephen Piscotty steps out of the batting cage after hitting during practice at the Cardinals spring training complex at Roger Dean Stadium in Jupiter, Fla. on Tuesday, Feb. 18, 2014. Photo By David Carson dcarson@post-dispatch.com  St. Louis Cardinals first baseman Matt Adams takes batting practice at the Cardinals spring training complex at Roger Dean Stadium in Jupiter, Fla. on Tuesday, Feb. 18, 2014. Photo By David Carson dcarson@post-dispatch.com 

Load-Date: December 23, 2014


End of Document


HOSPITALS COMPUTERIZE BEDSIDE MANNER IN FACE OF RISING COSTS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 2, 1989, SUNDAY, LATE FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 4E
Length: 765 words
Body


BOSTON - Hospitals may be one of the last remaining segments of society where computers are still rare, but soaring health-care costs and staff shortages are forcing these low-tech institutions to turn to automation.  Although U.S. hospitals already spend $5 billion a year on computer systems, industry analysts said most of the money goes for accounting systems and has little impact on operations.  But a market is emerging for computerized health-care systems with terminals that sit in every nursing station or, ideally, at every bedside.  These systems contain the patient's records, which can be updated at the bed, and are linked to laboratories and pharmacies in the hospital so that tests and drugs can be ordered immediately.  Some are linked to terminals in doctors' offices, allowing them to review the patient's care and order treatment even before arriving at the hospital.  Only 1 percent of all U.S. hospitals have such sophisticated systems now, but manufacturers say demand is growing by 30 percent annually and these systems could become commonplace in as little as three to five years.  The driving force is severe budget crunches that are forcing hospitals to re-evaluate their traditional, labor-intensive way of doing business.  ''Hospitals are one of the least automated industries there is,'' said Joe Ribotto, marketing director for Health Data Sciences Corp., one of the first companies to develop bedside computer systems.  ''Now that they have to watch the bottom line, they are seeing that the computer is as good a way to do that as anything,'' Ribotto said.
The pressure to change can be traced back to 1983, when the federal government mandated that hospitals be reimbursed a fixed amount for treating specific illnesses, regardless of the length of patient stay or the number of services provided.  Previously the government's Medicare and Medicaid programs, whose payments account for 40 percent of hospital revenues, paid for all services, whatever the cost.  Since then, revenues have shrunk while medical costs have soared, due to more high-tech treatment, an aging population and the growing AIDS epidemic.  Financial analysts say hospital costs have risen 50 percent over the past five years.  ''Truthfully, hospitals have no choice today'' regarding automation, said John Whitehead, president of TDS Healthcare Systems Corp., a former Revlon Corp. subsidiary. ''Our business is accelerating despite the health-care crisis.'' Patient-care systems are being offered by both small privately-held companies like TDS and Health Data Sciences and computer powerhouses like Data General Corp. and St. Louis-based Systems Group of American Express Information Services Co., formerly McDonnell Douglas Health Systems Co.  The systems are expensive - priced from $2,000 to $15,000 a termin al in a general hospital ward and as much as $25,000 each in a critical care unit.  Frances Cendrowska, a manager with Arthur Andersen & Co.'s health-care consulting group, said that ''when hospitals are strapped for cash these won't be the first thing they turn to buy.'' But, she said she is hearing a lot of interest in the systems from hospital administrators, and even more from the nurses and other health care workers that would use the system. ''They provide a lot of intangible benefits - a greater level of job satisfaction, more productivity, higher quality of care.'' Manufacturers say the systems generally pay for themselves in about three years through the benefits incurred.  A six-month study of three hospitals conducted by Peat Marwick & Co. found that patient-care systems on average reduced each nurse's overtime by 26.12 minutes a shift, translating into annual savings of $193,156 a hospital.  The study found the systems produced fuller documentation, fewer errors of omission and greater accuracy in care plans, including a 34 percent drop in medication errors.  Peat Marwick also found that the systems reduced turnover among nurses, who do most of the clerical duties in a hospital.  But, it found that doctors were reluctant to use them. This despite a recent study in the New England Journal of Medicine that doctors in hospitals spend far more time documenting a patient's history and examination than actually taking the history and performing the exam.  Whitehead said the systems are most efficient if doctors can be persuaded to use them, and TDS is constantly developing new ways to lure physicians.  Cendrowska said doctors coming out of medical school are used to computers and she expects them to find bedside terminals more acceptable.


Load-Date: October 25, 1993


End of Document


Cardinals vs. Astros: An analytics morality tale
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 30, 2015 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A15
Length: 821 words
Byline:  By Scott Nestler   
Body


As Post-Dispatch baseball writer Derrick Goold aptly reported in coverage of FBI allegations about the St. Louis Cardinals hacking scouting reports of the Houston Astros, this baseball drama contains a story about the increasingly competitive world of sports analytics. It is also a wake-up call for analytics professionals and other business leaders, not just in professional sports but across numerous industries, who have a vested interest in ensuring that this growing technical field adheres to stringent ethical guidelines and professional standards.
Michael Lewis' 2003 book "Moneyball" highlighted the importance of analytics in sports, but those of us in business, the public sector and academia have long admired the use of statistics, math and operations research to gain insights about major decisions from the data we collect. The notion of analytics is a simplification of a complex structure of the use and analysis of data and related information. One common taxonomy for analytics is:
• Descriptive analytics, which makes sense of current data about an organization;
• Predictive analytics, more involved, which examines data for clues to what's ahead;
• Prescriptive analytics, most complicated of all, which delves into the data and makes fact-based recommendations about the next decisions an organization should make.
Since analytics is a relatively new field, many of the people practicing it today have a degree in something else (universities have just recently begun to grant degrees in analytics). Those degrees could range from operations research and management science to data mining and business intelligence. I've even heard of those with undergraduate degrees in math and Ph.D.'s in physics who have hung up a shingle or joined an organization's fledgling analytics group.
That's why INFORMS (the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences) created a professional certification for analytics professionals. Called CAP, the Certified Analytics Professional program ensures uniform professional standards in analytics. Importantly, it also provides for a strict code of ethics governing the conduct of analytics professionals who have earned their CAP designation.
Clearly, CAP (or any other professional credential) might not have prevented the alleged Major League Baseball data hack, nor might it prevent future episodes of corporate data espionage. But it would have set certain standards for who get to call themselves analytics professionals and guidelines for how they should behave and be judged by their peers and employers.
For example, the CAP Code of Ethics states, "All professionals have societal obligations to perform their work in a professional, competent, and ethical manner." It isn't legal, and it certainly isn't ethical, to commit burglary, whether through your neighbor's window or through your competitor's computer. This sounds basic, but sometimes it is necessary to see our responsibilities in writing.
The CAP Code of Ethics goes on to say, "Analytics professionals have a responsibility to promote the effective and efficient use of analytical methods by all members of research teams and to respect the ethical obligations of members of other disciplines. … Misconduct broadly includes all professional dishonesty, by commission or omission, and, within the realm of professional activities and expression, all harmful disrespect for people, unauthorized or illegal use of their intellectual and physical property."
Whether the teams are in the boardroom or on the playing field, the sweet spot for any professional should be adhering to our ethical obligations.
Speaking from a business perspective, the FBI is charging that the St. Louis Cardinals stole the Houston Astros' intellectual property. We shout loudly when we believe that foreign hackers are spying on American business innovation or hacking into U.S. government computer systems, as with the recent announcement from the Office of Personnel Management. We need to speak just as loudly and clearly about protecting sensitive data and analytics from those right here at home who would abscond with them for dishonest purposes. Regardless of whether it is in professional sports or any other business sector, respecting the cornerstone of American competition and the protection of intellectual property is a key part of our obligations as citizens and scientists.
This saga is still unfolding. But it is a call to arms for all in our field, and those who hire us, to ensure that analytics professionals are properly educated and certified, and that we are the best possible stewards of the high ethical standards for the analytics profession.
---
Scott Nestler is the vice chairman of the Analytics Certification Board and a lead author of the Code of Ethics for the Certified Analytics Professional program. He is also a vice chairman of the INFORMS SpORts (Operations Research in Sports) Section.

Notes

   ANALYTICS STANDARDS 


Graphic

 
 "If you can't beat the Cardinals...call the FBI" reads Derrick Driskill's sign as he and his girlfriend Maggie Inhofe walk into Busch Stadium on Tuesday, June 16, 2015. The New York Times published a story Tuesday morning stating that the FBI is investigating if the front-office officials of the St. Louis Cardinals hacked into the Houston Astros network. Photo By David Carson, dcarson@post-dispatch.com 

Load-Date: July 1, 2015


End of Document


Book, tour thrust Palin back into the public eye Her performance will count more than content of tome, experts say, but comeback chance called slim.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 17, 2009 Tuesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 854 words
Byline: by jane henderson • Post-Dispatch Book Editor , jhenderson@post-dispatch.com,  > 314-340-8107
Dateline: 0 
Body


Between the covers of Sarah Palin's new memoir is a 413-page bid for profit. But it's not just money she wants to bank. She expects political payoff, too.
The former vice presidential candidate probably will pocket millions from "Going Rogue," which officially goes on sale today. Perhaps as important, however, is that a best-seller is a way for Palin to stay in the public eye - and perhaps polish the tarnished image of a Republican go-getter who abruptly quit her job as Alaska's governor.
Any benefit to her image will depend more on the book tour - a 14-state trek that began Monday with an appearance on "Oprah" - rather than the book itself, said Wayne Fields, professor of English and American culture studies at Washington University. Political turnarounds don't depend on a well-written memoir, Fields said. They also don't depend on factual accuracy.
"It's the overall performance," he said. "The book itself probably doesn't do much to improve the image. Everybody knows they're ghost-written. People buy them, but I'm not so sure that very many people read them or read much of them."
But they do manage to make money, Fields said, and lead to placement on "Oprah" and "media shows with commentators who are friendly to that position."
Press reception of the book could indeed help Palin's credibility, said Matthew Hall, assistant professor of political science at St. Louis University. But there is no social science data showing that political memoirs can remake a career, he said.
Another political science expert says that no matter how the book is received, Palin's shot at the presidency in 2012 is slim.
"She has no chance of going anywhere in 2012," says Kenneth Warren, a professor of political science at St. Louis University and president of The Warren Poll.
"She is a celebrity. A lot of people just love her. ... But the book is not going to change the image of Sarah Palin."
Early stories and reviews have focused on Palin's jabs at John McCain's campaign staffers, her expressions of faith and love for family, and descriptions of plucky frontier life in Alaska.
Fields said Palin's book is geared toward "getting some scores settled, getting that reported and getting on the shows."
Nevertheless, "Going Rogue" is part of a new trend of memoirs by politicos who have some explaining to do. Even if a book can't fix a blemished image, it seems to be part of every politician's marketing toolbox this year.
In September, disgraced Rod Blagojevich released "The Governor: The Truth Behind the Political Scandal That Continues to Rock the Nation." The former governor, impeached by the Illinois Legislature and facing federal corruption charges, tried to defend his time in office, but critics called him and the book "a bad joke."
Even Edward Kennedy, who died in August of brain cancer, focused some of his last years on leaving a memoir that, in part, apologized for the fatal accident that haunted his long Senate career.
The first news stories about the release of "True Compass" led with quotations on how Kennedy described actions after the car accident and drowning of Mary Jo Kopechne in 1969. Despite at least a dozen books about that event (not to mention the hundreds of books about other Kennedy family trials and tragedies), no prominent family member had ever written the kind of very personal memoir that Ted Kennedy's publisher released this September, just weeks after the Massachusetts politician's death.
According to the Washington Post, former Vice President Dick Cheney, "who has spent a professional lifetime ignoring unflattering stories," now says that his memoir, slated for spring 2011, will describe his arguments with President George W. Bush.
Likewise, the former commander in chief is working on telling his own side. He told The Associated Press that although his memoir might include some self-criticism about his decisions, he would make sure readers could view events as he saw them.
Politicians seem to believe they are never out of the game completely, Fields said, "no matter how badly they've screwed up or been vilified." Plus, they like the limelight and "have an endless need for money."
Another influence on the plethora of political memoirs is modern publishing technology, which allows greater speed and volume in printing and distribution.
Publishers badger celebrities and political celebrities for books, then sell them in bulk to special-interest groups who hand them out like party favors at events.
In a world in which indicted politicians aren't too humiliated to appear on reality TV dance competitions, pride in literary truthfulness or quality is no barrier to publishing.
After Tom DeLay was accused in Texas of breaking campaign finance laws, he stepped down as U.S. House majority leader. He published a memoir in 2007 likening his political foes to Nazis, but "No Retreat, No Surrender" didn't put him back on Capitol Hill.
He did, however, get to cha-cha this year on ABC's "Dancing With the Stars."
Will Palin waltz into the Oval Office after "Going Rogue"?
"My money isn't on her," said Hall, the political science professor. "But only a fool counts people out."

Graphic

 
 Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Sarah Palin's new book officially goes on sale today. 

Load-Date: November 17, 2009


End of Document


Allen, Robert (Bob) E. Died July 1st
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 6, 2014 Sunday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2014 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING
Length: 228 words
Body


Allen, Robert (Bob) E. Died July 1st, 2014 on the eve of his 81st Birthday. Survived by his wife Lynn (nee Elbert) and 4 Daughters and Sons-in-Law: Darcy (Mark) Nadler, Jennifer (Mike) Balota, Betsy (Bill) Wendell, Amy (Skip) Igo. 
He was "PawPaw" to Andrew, Lauren, Graham, Garrett, Joel, Abby and Paige. He is also survived by his Brother and Sister-in-Law Bill and Pat Tancill of Livonia, Michigan, Sister-in-Law Judy Favell of Mt. Dora, Florida, Jim Favell of Morganton, North Carolina and his many nieces and nephews. His Mother, Father and brother John predeceased him. Bob served in the Korean War and after graduating from Washington University, he started working for IBM and later founded Data Science Corporation in 1962. Bob retired and closed Data Science in 2011. Bob's family was everything to him. He was a true Gentleman and was lovingly known for his great sense of humor and generosity. He loved the outdoors and spending time in Destin, Florida. Our thanks to Dr. Neil Ettinger, Denise, and Anna at Pulmonary Associates of St. Lukes Hospital. In lieu of flowers, please send donations to: Pulmonary Fibrosis Foundation, 23 E. Ohio Street #304, Chicago, Illinois 60611. Services: Bob's body was cremated and the celebration of his life will be held Saturday, August 9th, 2014 at: Eliot Unitarian Chapel, 100 S. Taylor, Kirkwood, Mo 63122 (314)821-0911.

Load-Date: July 6, 2014


End of Document


A potentially historic step Economic development • Regional leaders support Missouri jobs legislation. OTHER VIEWS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 7, 2011 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A15
Length: 753 words
Byline: By Bob Soutier and Dick Fleming
Dateline: 0 
Body


Labor and business understandably have their differences on some policy issues, but they agree completely on this: The proposed bipartisan economic development bill in the special session of the Missouri Legislature that started this week may well be the most sweeping job-creating legislation in Missouri's recent history - and it needs to be passed.
Landmark tools to expand our region's jobs in plant and life sciences and data centers are included in the legislation. A jobs-creating measure to export our products to China and throughout the world is a central feature. The package includes enhancements to our ability to attract major sports events and other new tools for economic development.
There is no question that Missouri needs to stimulate more jobs and private investment. While the bistate region has fared relatively better than most of the nation in the recent recession, our region's unemployment rate has been stuck at 8.8 percent. Nearly 129,000 people are unemployed in the metro area, according to the Missouri Economic Research and Information Center.
As a state, we have fared less well. Missouri currently ranks just 33rd nationally in job creation over the past year. It has lost jobs in seven of the last 12 months.
Now, as the special legislative session begins, the "planets are aligning" within the business and labor communities throughout Missouri, and with the legislative leadership and the governor, to push for timely passage of these essential tools to help create jobs.
The keystone of the overall economic development package is the Aerotropolis Trade Incentive Act. This legislation would directly stimulate and encourage development of international cargo and manufacturing facilities within a 50-mile radius of Lambert-St. Louis International Airport. The act would potentially provide $360 million in tax credits over 15 years - up to $60 million to encourage freight forwarders to direct cargo through St. Louis, and up to $300 million to encourage developments to stimulate international cargo and related manufacturing around Lambert.
The Aerotropolis tax credits are performance-based; that is, not one cent would be paid out by the state unless it had been earned - in advance - by companies meeting the qualifications set forth in the legislation. In other words, taxpayers will receive the benefits of new jobs, construction and investment before the incentives are even issued. And the benefits could be enormous.
An independent economic impact analysis by two of the nation's leading experts in cargo logistics and economic development incentives conservatively concluded that if the $300 million package of infrastructure incentives were fully subscribed, they would generate more than 18,000 construction jobs over eight years, at least 11,000 new permanent full-time jobs, and a minimum of some $17 billion in net new economic output for the region and state over the 15-year term of the incentives.
Over a 20-year period - recognizing that the incentive certainly would be stimulating growth beyond the term of the actual legislation - that economic impact grows to $27 billion.
Several other important job-creation initiatives are included in the statewide economic development package, namely:
- The Missouri Science and Innovation Reinvestment Act, which has been a top legislative priority for the St. Louis Regional Chamber and Growth Association for the past three years, would provide a stable source of funding to invest in high-tech entrepreneurial infrastructure and foster the creation of 21st-century jobs.
- Incentives for data-storage centers would help attract major capital investments and support highly skilled information technology jobs.
- Incentives for amateur sporting events would help the St. Louis Sports Commission and their counterparts around the state attract major events like the NCAA Final Four.
- Compete Missouri would help streamline existing economic development incentive programs and allow critical "up-front funding" for certain highly competitive projects, as well as new retention benefits to help retain jobs in the face of competition from other states.
Timely passage of the economic development legislation as proposed in the special session is essential to support job creation in the State of Missouri. We urge our Missouri legislators to vote "yes."
---
Bob Soutier is president of the Greater St. Louis Labor Council, AFL-CIO. Dick Fleming is president and chief executive of the St. Louis Regional Chamber and Growth Association.

Graphic

 
 GRAPHIC by Tim Brinton • Newsart  (Graphic not available. See attached PDF.) 

Load-Date: September 8, 2011


End of Document


Safety board wants "black boxes" in vehicles
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 4, 2004 Wednesday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 279 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The National Transportation Safety Board on Tuesday recommended that the federal government require passenger vehicles to be equipped with devices that record speed, seat belt use, braking and other factors.
The safety board's recommendation arose from its investigation of the farmers market crash in Santa Monica, Calif., last summer that killed 10 people and injured 63.
Safety investigators were unable to interview the elderly driver who stepped on the gas pedal instead of the brake.
The board concluded that investigators could have gained a better scientific understanding of the driver's behavior had his 1992 Buick LeSabre been outfitted with a data recorder.
"We believe very strongly that vehicles should have a black box," said safety board chairman Ellen Engleman Conners.
In June, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said automakers are adding black boxes fast enough on their own. About 15 percent of vehicles now on the road have the data recorders, and the traffic safety agency says from 65 percent to 90 percent of 2004 vehicles have some sort of recording ability.
The agency at the same time proposed that recorders collect a standard set of data to help crash investigators. If the agency has its way, by September 2008, recorders will collect up to 42 data elements, including the time it takes for air bags to deploy.
The safety board on Tuesday said that doesn't go far enough.
Engleman Conners said the safety board can't investigate each of the annual 43,000 traffic accident deaths. Black boxes would help investigators collect facts, science and data on the crashes, she said.
"The basic question I have is, 'Why not?'" Engleman Conners said.

Load-Date: August 4, 2004


End of Document


Smithfield closes South Dakota pork plant due to coronavirus
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 13, 2020 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 632 words
Byline:  ASSOCIATED PRESS 
Body


SIOUX FALLS, S.D. - Virginia-based Smithfield Foods announced Sunday that it is closing its pork processing plant in Sioux Falls until further notice after hundreds of employees tested positive for the coronavirus - a step the head of the company warned could hurt the nation's meat supply.
The announcement came a day after South Dakota Gov. Kristi Noem and Sioux Falls Mayor Paul TenHaken wrote to Smithfield and urged the company to suspend operations for 14 days so that its workers could self-isolate and the plant could be disinfected.
The plant, which employs about 3,700 people in the state's largest city, has become a hot spot for infections. Health officials said Sunday that 293 of the 730 people who have been diagnosed with COVID-19 in South Dakota work at the plant.
"As a critical infrastructure employer for the nation's food supply chain and a major employer in Sioux Falls, it is crucial that Smithfield have a healthy workforce to ensure the continuity of operations to feed the nation. At the same time, employees need a healthy work environment," Noem and TenHaken wrote to the plant's operators.
Smithfield announced a three-day closure last week so it could sanitize the plant and install physical barriers to enhance social distancing. But on Sunday, it announced the plant's indefinite closure.
"The closure of this facility, combined with a growing list of other protein plants that have shuttered across our industry, is pushing our country perilously close to the edge in terms of our meat supply," Smithfield president and CEO Kenneth Sullivan said in a statement.
The Sioux Falls facility is one of the largest pork processing plants in the U.S., Smithfield said. It supplies nearly 130 million servings of food per week, or about 18 million servings per day.
There has been no evidence that the coronavirus is being transmitted through food or its packaging, according to the Department of Agriculture.
Other meat processing plants have also closed temporarily because of outbreaks of the coronavirus, including a Tyson Foods facility in Columbus Junction, Iowa, where more than two dozen employees tested positive.
(Sullivan said Smithfield had been operating during the coronavirus crisis because it wanted to sustain the nation's food supply.
"We believe it is our obligation to help feed the country, now more than ever. We have a stark choice as a nation: we are either going to produce food or not, even in the face of COVID-19," he said.
Maggie Seidel, Noem's senior advisor and policy director, said in an emailed statement Sunday that science and data support a 14-day closure to slow the spread of the virus in the community.
"Obviously, the situation is dynamic and changing by the day. The industry (like the country) needs to fight its way through this situation – and it will – and make adjustments as it changes. As a critical infrastructure industry in our nation's food supply, the Governor is committed to working with them to get through this," Seidel wrote.
Smithfield said there will be some activity at the plant on Tuesday to process product that's already in inventory. It will resume operations in Sioux Falls after receiving further directions from local, state and federal officials. The company said it will continue to pay its workers for the next two weeks.
For most people, the coronavirus causes mild or moderate symptoms, such as fever and cough that clear up in two to three weeks. For some, especially older adults and people with existing health problems, it can cause more severe illness, including pneumonia, and death.
There had been six COVID-19-related deaths in South Dakota as of Sunday.)
> Archiving note: A shorter version of this article appeared in print. Additional text, in parentheses, is from the online article at stltoday.com.

Load-Date: April 15, 2020


End of Document


Hochman: Study says Blues will get boost with Yeo
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 4, 2017 Saturday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS; Pg. B1
Length: 1057 words
Byline:  By Benjamin Hochman St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


Tangled up in an on-ice tango, Ryan Reaves then skated Thursday toward the Blues' bench, where he was actually corralled again.
This time, a right arm wrapped around Reaves from behind. It was coach Mike Yeo behind the players, leaning into Reaves' left ear, energetically encouraging No. 75.
It was a new image in these parts - the Blues' head coach breaking that wall, coaching up his team, aggressively patting them on the backs and such.
Maybe that's the Mike Yeo we'll see here. Regardless, in the short term, Mike Yeo will benefit by being Not Ken Hitchcock.
Hitch will be a Hall of Famer someday, but for February 2017, his coaching style represents the old guard. Beyond hockey strategy, Yeo's energy and mannerisms and calming presence should be more of an elixir than any X's or O's.
If we look at the short term, teams historically get a boost when a younger coach takes over. The Blues of course won their first game with Yeo, 5-1 over Toronto, and on Saturday host the defending champs from Pittsburgh.
"What my analysis tends to show is that replacing a coach with young coaching blood has a larger positive bump on the winning record than more experienced coaches," explained Jean-Rene Gauthier on Friday.
A one-time astronomer, Gauthier is now a data scientist who compiled a study entitled: "The Data Science of Firing Your (NHL) Coach." It's a fascinating read. He pointed out that in the past 40 seasons, the Blues have fired more in-season coaches than any other franchise - Hitch made it 16. The Rangers (12) and Capitals (11) are next in line.
He meticulously looked at each of the 212 coaching changes in the past 40 seasons, and his calculations showed that a team's winning percentage, after firing the coach, had an average bump of .057 - so if the team was playing .500 hockey (with an even record of wins and losses), after the firing, the team would play .557 hockey.
Gauthier, who works for the Culver City, Calif. company DataScience Inc., wanted to find common characteristics among the winning new coaches. He looked at age, number of games coached in the NHL, winning percentage and any championships won. He determined that if a coach is replaced by a coach older than 42 years old, the new coach doesn't generate a statistically significant difference with wins. But a younger coach will fare better in his first partial season with the team. Well, Yeo is right on that line at age 43.
"In-season changes have been in decline for the last several years, though," Gauthier said. "In fact, the rate of in-season coaching changes is in decline since the 1970s. General managers seem to be more patient with their coaches."
But in the case of the Blues, patience evaporated.
And sure enough, the Blues had a jolt in Yeo's first game. We'll see how long the team is re energized. But the numbers suggest the team should fare a little better than with Hitch. And that might be just what they need to make the playoffs.
It was accidentally fitting. Nos. 5 and 51 are two of the most-revered numbers in Cardinals history. And sure enough, "5 and 51" were the terms of the contract for Carlos Martinez, who has the stuff of legend. Carlos signed his five-year contract for $51 million (with two team options for a sixth and seventh year), and it really was a refreshing moment. Considering that the AAV (annual average value) is $10.2 million, and that goes for a pitcher in ages 25-30, and a pitcher who is already an All-Star and flirts with a 3.00 ERA? Man. In reference to the forever-arguing folks on Twitter, I liked what @LanceDance1 said: "Very rarely are things unanimously agreed upon on #STLCards Twitter. This Martinez news is fun."
Wanted to remind Mizzou fans again - Saturday night is the second annual #RallyForRhyan Game. Rhyan is the young daughter of coaching staff member Brad Loos, and she's in a continuing fight against pediatric cancer.
At last season's #RallyForRhyan Game, Mizzou raised more than $50,000 for pediatric cancer research. A season-high 10,356 spectators came to the game.
The Tigers host Arkansas at 5 p.m.
Some tidbits. Perhaps the best quote out of national signing day came from Mizzou offensive line coach Glen Elarbee. Speaking about three-star recruit Larry Borom, a 6-foot-5, 338-pound guard, Elarbee said: "He's a Coke machine with a helmet on." … During Florida's pummeling of Mizzou's basketball team on Thursday, famed sportswriter and author Seth Davis tweeted: "Missouri might be the worst power conference team I've ever seen." … Former Blues great Chris Pronger has become the unexpected star of the Internet this past week, thanks to a play from last weekend's celebrity game during the NHL's All-Star festivities. In the game, the looming Pronger unleashed a check into the boards on, of all people, Justin Bieber. The photo is perfect - Pronger manically enjoying the tenacious check, while a helpless teen pop star is pressed into the glass. And the photo went viral. It's now arguable that the two most iconic photos in hockey history involve the Blues: the snapshot of Pronger's check and the soaring, scoring Bobby Orr, winning the Stanley Cup against St. Louis.
Some more tidbits. At his annual news conference during Super Bowl week, NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell actually said this, about the chance of St. Louis getting another NFL team: "No real discussions yet with community leaders but lot of respect for the city." Yeah, we totally feel your respect, Roger. … Here's a barstool debate for baseball movie fans: Who was a better player in "A League Of Their Own," Dottie Hinson or Marla Hooch? Who's got the wartime WAR for the Rockford Peaches? Hooch could wallop, but I'd go with Geena Davis' Hinson, because she was like Yadi behind the plate and Mike Piazza at it. … Billy Joel is coming to Busch Stadium on Sept. 21, the Cards announced this week. And so, tweeters began coming up with Joel and Cards play-on-words, using the hashtag #BillyJoelatBusch. Some of my favorites of the song or lyric inspired:
- We Didn't Start Eric Fryer - You Mabry Right - Tell Herr About It - Billy Joel Piñeiro - "You may be right ... I may GO CRAZY!" - Only The Good Cy Young - We Didn't Stottlemyre
- And Sports Illustrated writer Steve Rushin sent in this one, per the song "Zanzibar" - "I've got the old man's car, I've got a jazz guitar, and I've got a Joaquin Andujar ..."

Graphic

 
 St. Louis Blues head coach Mike Yeo coaches his first game for the Blues during a game between the St. Louis Blues and the Toronto Maple Leafs on Thursday, Feb. 2, 2017, at the Scottrade Center in St. Louis. Photo by Chris Lee, clee@post-dispatch.com 

Load-Date: February 6, 2017


End of Document


University says S. Korean faked data on stem cells
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 23, 2005 Friday
SECOND EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A13
Length: 246 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: SEOUL, SOUTH KOREA 
Body


South Korean researcher Hwang Woo-suk faked results of at least nine of 11 stem cell lines he claimed to have created, his university said Friday.
The school -- Seoul National University -- called his action a deliberate deception that undermined the credibility of science.
The university's announcement of its investigation into Hwang's work was the first confirmation of allegations that have cast a shadow over his breakthroughs in cloning and stem cell technology.
"This kind of error is a grave act that damages the foundation of science," the panel said.
In a paper in the May issue of the journal Science, Hwang claimed to have created 11 stem cell lines matched to patients. The achievement raised hopes of tailored therapies for hard-to-treat diseases.
But one of his former collaborators said last week that nine of the 11 cell lines had been faked. That charge prompted reviews by the journal and by a panel at Seoul National University, where Hwang works.
The panel said today it had found that "the laboratory data for 11 stem cell lines that were reported in the 2005 paper were all data made using two stem cell lines in total."
"Based on these facts, the data in the 2005 Science paper cannot be some error from a simple mistake but cannot be but seen as a deliberate fabrication," the panel said.
"There is no way but that Professor Hwang has been involved," the university's dean of research affairs, Roe Jung-hye, said. He added that Hwang "somewhat admits to this."

Load-Date: December 24, 2005


End of Document


HEALTH & SCIENCE NOTES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 5, 1991, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE; Pg. 4D
Length: 736 words
Body


Pro heredity: A study of twins raised in different households shows that genesexert the strongest influence on intelligence, according to researchers from the University of Minnesota.  The researchers found that 70 percent of the influence on IQ scores was hereditary and about 30 percent was a result of environment.  The scientists based their conclusions on 50 pairs of twins who were separated as infants, reared apart, and reunited as adults.  ''They do indicate that, in the current environments of the broad middle class, in industrialized societies, two-thirds of the observed variance of IQ can be traced to genetic variation,'' the study said.  The research contradicts some earlier studies of twins that attributed about half of the similarity in intelligence tests to genetics and half to environmental effects.  Some researchers, however, suggest that the number of twins in the current study is too small to make sweeping conclusions.  The study's lead author, Thomas Bouchard, also warned that the findings cannot be applied to all people since none of those studied were raised by poor or illiterate parents.  The report was published last week in the journal Science.  .  Greenhouse debate: Debate still rages over whether North America is warming because of the greenhouse effect. But if it is, a new study by a Canadian research team provides a dismaying preview of things to come.  For the past 20 years, scientists from the Freshwater Institute, a government agency in Winnipeg, have monitored environmental changes in the Experimental Lakes Area of northwestern Ontario, a region most Americans regard as irredeemably cold.
But the group reported in last week's issue of Science that its data show ''almost continuous warming and increased incidence of intermittent drought.'' Since 1969, average air and water temperatures have risen 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit, forest fires have become more frequent and the duration of the ice-free season has grown by three weeks a year. These changes caused severe disruption of the ecosystem. Wind speeds and evaporation increased; soil moisture and runoff decreased; and the top layer of lake water became more transparent and warmer, resulting in smaller populations of trout and shrimp and larger colonies of plankton.  .  Alzheimer's advance: Researchers have found an important clue to how a brain protein may produce Alzheimer's disease, and how it may be possible someday to prevent the protein's toxic effects.  The protein, called amyloid-beta, is deposited in brain cells of patients with Alzheimer's disease.  Studying its effect on rat brain cells growing in a laboratory, Bruce A.  Yankner and colleagues at Harvard Medical School found that a piece of the protein stimulated growth of young brain cells but poisoned older ones - damaging their connections with other nerve cells and reducing their lifespan.  The toxic piece of amyloid-beta turned out to resemble a family of natural brain substances called tachykinins.  When the researchers added both amyloid-beta and tachykinins to dishes containing the older cells, they discovered that certain tachykinins completely prevented amyloid-beta from damaging the cells.  ''If it can be shown that amyloid-beta is the critical factor in causing selective nerve cell loss, we will have a major handle on slowing or stopping Alzheimer's disease,'' noted Zaven Khachaturian of the National Institute on Aging, which helped fund the research.  Tachykinins, he added, ''could then be the basis of future treatments.'' The findings were reported in last week's issue of the journal Science.  .  Living longer: Middle-aged men who live alone or with someone other than a spouse die much sooner than men who live with their wives.  In a study of 7,651 adults, epidemiologists at the University of California at San Francisco found that 23 percent of men between 45 and 54 who lived without a wife would be dead within 10 years, compared with 11 percent of men of similar age who lived with their wives.  Even after controlling for socioeconomic factors and lifestyle, men between 45 and 64 had twice the risk of dying as men in the same age group who lived with spouses.  ''Of particular interest from our analysis is that both men who live alone and those who live with someone other than a spouse are equally disadvantaged for survival,'' noted Maradee A. Davis, the UCSF researcher who conducted the study.


Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document


Pfizer says COVID-19 vaccine is looking 90% effective (copy)
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 10, 2020 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1072 words
Byline:  By LAURAN NEERGAARD and LINDA A. JOHNSON Associated Press  
Body


Pfizer Inc. said Monday that its COVID-19 vaccine may be a remarkable 90% effective, based on early and incomplete test results that nevertheless brought a big burst of optimism to a world desperate for the means to finally bring the catastrophic outbreak under control.
The announcement came less than a week after an election seen as a referendum on President Donald Trump's handling of the scourge, which has killed more than 1.2 million people worldwide, including almost a quarter-million in the United States alone.
"We're in a position potentially to be able to offer some hope," Dr. Bill Gruber, Pfizer's senior vice president of clinical development, told the Associated Press. "We're very encouraged."
Pfizer, which is developing the vaccine with its German partner BioNTech, is on track to apply later this month for emergency-use approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, once it has the necessary safety information in hand.
Pfizer said in May that company-owned sites in Missouri, Michigan, Massachusetts and Belgium have been identified as manufacturing centers for vaccine production.
On Monday, the company said its Chesterfield facility is producing plasmid DNA for the vaccine antigen. The drug is being produced at Pfizer's facility in Andover, Massachusetts.
Even if all goes well, authorities have stressed it is unlikely any vaccine will arrive much before the end of the year, and the limited initial supplies will be rationed.
Dr. Anthony Fauci, the U.S. government's top infectious-disease expert, said the results suggesting 90% effectiveness are "just extraordinary," adding: "Not very many people expected it would be as high as that."
"It's going to have a major impact on everything we do with respect to COVID," Fauci said as Pfizer appeared to take the lead in the all-out global race by pharmaceutical companies and various countries to develop a well-tested vaccine against the virus.
Dr. Bruce Aylward, the World Health Organization's senior adviser, said Pfizer's vaccine could "fundamentally change the direction of this crisis" by March, when the U.N. agency hopes to start vaccinating high-risk groups.
Global markets, already buoyed by the victory of President-elect Joe Biden, rallied on the news from Pfizer. The S&P 500 finished the day with a gain of 1.2%, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average rose more than 800 points. Pfizer stock was up more than 8%.
Still, Monday's announcement doesn't mean for certain that a vaccine is imminent: This interim analysis, from an independent data monitoring board, looked at 94 infections recorded so far in a study that has enrolled nearly 44,000 people in the U.S. and five other countries.
Some participants got the vaccine, while others got dummy shots. Pfizer released no specific breakdowns, but for the vaccine to be 90% effective, nearly all the infections must have occurred in placebo recipients. The study is continuing, and Pfizer cautioned that the protection rate might change as more COVID-19 cases are added to the calculations.
Daniel Bogard, a Creve Coeur resident and a rabbi at Central Reform Congregation in St. Louis, saw an advertisement on Facebook in the spring asking if he would be interested in participating in a vaccine trial. He said he entered his contact information, and heard back a couple of months later about joining the Pfizer trial. He said he was enrolled, and received two doses in September, a few weeks apart.
He said he hopes Monday's news brings people hope.
"If we're going to get back to some semblance of normal, it's going to take a vaccine," Bogard said. "This felt like a way that I could maybe help, in my own little corner of the world."
Dr. Jesse Goodman of Georgetown University, former chief of the FDA's vaccine division, called the partial results "extremely promising" but ticked off many questions still to be answered, including how long the vaccine's effects last and whether it protects older people as well as younger ones.
Pfizer's vaccine is among four candidates already in huge studies in the U.S., with still more being tested in other countries. Another U.S. company, Moderna Inc., also hopes to file an application with the FDA late this month.
Both companies' shots are made with a brand-new technology. These "mRNA vaccines" aren't made with the coronavirus itself, meaning there's no chance anyone could catch it from the shots. Instead, the vaccine contains a piece of genetic code that trains the immune system to recognize the spiked protein on the surface of the virus.
The timing of Pfizer's announcement is likely to feed unsubstantiated suspicions from Trump supporters that the pharmaceutical industry was withholding the news until after the election. Donald Trump Jr. tweeted: "The timing of this is pretty amazing. Nothing nefarious about the timing of this at all right?"
Pfizer said its work is not influenced by politics and that it was "moving at the speed of science." Its independent data monitors met on Sunday, analyzing the COVID-19 test results so far and notifying Pfizer.
Pfizer initially opted not to join the Trump administration's Operation Warp Speed, which helped fund a half-dozen vaccine makers' research and manufacturing scale-up. Pfizer instead said it has invested $2 billion of its own money in testing and expanding manufacturing capacity. But in July, Pfizer signed a contract to supply the U.S. with 100 million doses for $1.95 billion, assuming the vaccine is cleared by the FDA.
Pfizer said its only involvement in Operation Warp Speed is that those doses are part of the administration's goal to have 300 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines ready sometime next year.
The strong results were a surprise. Scientists have warned for months that any COVID-19 shot may be only as good as flu vaccines, which are about 50% effective and require yearly immunizations. Earlier this year, Fauci said he would be happy with a COVID-19 vaccine that was 60% effective.
Whatever the ultimate level of protection, no one knows if people will need regular vaccinations.
Also, volunteers in the study received a coronavirus test only if they developed symptoms, leaving unanswered whether vaccinated people could get infected but show no symptoms and unknowingly spread the virus.
Pfizer has estimated it could have 50 million doses available globally by the end of 2020, enough for 25 million people.
Annika Merrilees of the Post-Dispatch contributed to this report.

Graphic

 
 FILE - This May 4, 2020, file photo provided by the University of Maryland School of Medicine, shows the first patient enrolled in Pfizer's COVID-19 coronavirus vaccine clinical trial at the University of Maryland School of Medicine in Baltimore. On Monday, Nov. 9, 2020, Pfizer said an early peek at its vaccine data suggests the shots may be 90% effective at preventing COVID-19. (Courtesy of University of Maryland School of Medicine via AP, File)  FILE - In this Monday, Nov. 23, 2015, file photo, the Pfizer logo is displayed at world headquarters in New York. On Monday, Nov. 9, 2020, Pfizer said an early peek at its vaccine data suggests the shots may be 90% effective at preventing COVID-19. (AP Photo/Mark Lennihan, File)  This October 2020 photo provided by Pfizer shows part of a "freezer farm," a football field-sized facility for storing finished COVID-19 vaccines, under construction in Kalamazoo, Mich. Pfizer's experimental vaccine requires ultracold storage, at about -70°C, so as they are made, the vaccines are being stored in special freezers until the Food and Drug Administration approves use and the vaccines can be distributed. (Jeremy Davidson/Pfizer via AP)  FILE - In this Feb. 26, 2019 file photo, Albert Bourla, chief executive officer of Pfizer, prepares to testify before the Senate Finance Committee hearing on drug prices, on Capitol Hill in Washington. On Monday, Nov. 9, 2020, Pfizer said that an early peek at the data on its coronavirus vaccine suggests the shots may be a surprisingly robust 90% effective at preventing COVID-19, putting the company on track to apply later this month for emergency-use approval from the Food and Drug Administration. (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais, File)  A stock ticker with Pfizer stock information is shown at the New York Stock Exchange, Monday, Nov. 9, 2020. World markets rocketed higher after Pfizer said early data show its coronavirus vaccine is effective. That added to investor relief that results from the U.S. presidential election were finally decided, with Joe Biden declared the president-elect. (AP Photo/Mark Lennihan)  Pfizer said Monday an early peek at its vaccine data suggests the shots may be 90% effective at preventing COVID-19.  

Load-Date: November 10, 2020


End of Document


RESEARCHERS SAY NEW DATA SHOW THREAT OF QUAKE IS BUILDING ALONG NEW MADRID;
FAULT;
STUDY SAYS THAT STRAIN IS MOUNTING MORE THAN PREVIOUS EVIDENCE INDICATED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 5, 1999, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A1
Length: 736 words
Byline: William Allen; Post-Dispatch Science Writer
Body

 
Tracking the fault
Scientists find that the New Madrid Fault is moving about 5 or 6 millimeters a year -- about a quarter of an inch.
Scientists are firing another salvo today in the war over whether the "big one" is coming from the New Madrid Fault.
In today's issue of the journal Science, a team led by researchers at the University of Colorado at Boulder reports new evidence of a major threat from the fault.
"You've got enough stored energy to shake the living daylights out of the lower Mississippi River Valley," said Karl Mueller, a structural geologist at the university who led the team.
The study by Mueller and his colleagues shows that more strain is building in the fault than was found by a study published April 23 in Science. That study, led by researchers at Northwestern University, found that the risk of a major earthquake in the fault has been overestimated. But one of the Northwestern researchers, Seth Stein, said today's report was "completely consistent" with his group's study.
At issue is the scientific basis for warnings to prepare for a major quake in the New Madrid Fault. The fault got its name from New Madrid, Mo., a town where one of many powerful quakes in 1811-12 was centered. Also at issue is how much to prepare people and buildings.
The New Madrid Fault runs for more than 100 miles from northeastern Arkansas, through the Missouri Bootheel and into the southern tip of Illinois. Like a multipronged lightning bolt, the fault zigzags and branches off in many directions and at various lengths deep beneath the ground.
A major quake along the fault could cause damage hundreds of miles away, many scientists say.
New technology and government funding have allowed scientists to examine the fault more closely.
In the April Science paper, researchers using data gathered by satellite reported finding little or no ground motion in the fault over six years and concluded that the hazard from great earthquakes "has been significantly overestimated."
But the evidence published today "shows the New Madrid seismic zone is indeed a threat, which contradicts" the April study, Mueller said. He was joined in the research by Jocasta Champion of Colorado; Margaret Guccione of the University of Arkansas, Fayetteville; and Keith Kelson of William Lettis and Associates, Walnut Creek, Calif.
Mueller and his colleagues looked at the fault using what scientists call "fault-related fold theory."
Put simply, that means they look at the shape of the wrinkles and folds near the top of the earth's crust and use their shape to estimate the shape of a fault miles below. They also can estimate how the fault is moving.
The concept is like setting a layer cake down across the edge of a table. The part of the cake hanging off the table will move down. By cutting the cake and looking at the wrinkles in the layers, the amount of relative movement between the two parts can be deduced.
The scientists studied the shape of the land surface in the Lake County area of western Tennessee.
Then they cut the cake, digging trenches hundreds of feet long and 12 feet deep through part of the region near Reelfoot Lake in the flood plain of the Mississippi River. They carefully mapped the wrinkles in the layers of sediments deposited by the river over the past 2,400 years.
Combined with other information, they found that the fault at that location is moving at about 5 or 6 millimeters a year - about a quarter of an inch. That might not seem like much until you consider that it equals nearly 3 feet of movement since the great New Madrid quakes of 1811-12.
"The spring is being stretched," Mueller said. "You're adding energy to the earthquake engine."
Stein said of the two studies, his and Mueller's: "It's very gratifying that you get essentially the same answer," even though the techniques the two groups used were different.
The difference, he explained, is that his group found a 7.0 magnitude quake could occur every 500 years on average, whereas Mueller's group found a quake of magnitude 7.2 to 7.5 could occur during that period.
That still means federal earthquake hazard maps of the region show a risk that's too high, Stein said. These maps assume a quake of magnitude 8.0 or greater is pos sible.
In May, an expert panel from the Central U.S. Earthquake Consortium State Geologists recommended against relaxing building codes or easing preparations for the Big One in the New Madrid Fault.     

Graphic

 
MAP Color Map - New Madrid Fault
 Reelfoot Lake, Tenn., site of study
 (Map shows location of the New Madrid Fault through Arkansas, Tennessee, Kentucky, Missouri, Illinois and Indiana. Map also shows location of Reelfoot Lake, Tennessee. Also noted is the edge of an ancient ocean bay covering Arkansas, Tennessee, Kentucky, Missouri and Illinois.)
 Source: Missouri Department of Natural Resources, The University of Memphis.

Load-Date: November 5, 1999


End of Document


HEALTH DIGEST
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 27, 2003 Thursday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Health Digest Column; Pg. A16
Length: 553 words
Byline: From News Services
Body


WASHINGTON
Data show higher rate of HIV infection in gay men
The number of gay men newly diagnosed with HIV infection was 17 percent higher last year than in 1999, according to data released Wednesday by government epidemiologists. The increase provides more evidence that the epidemic is resurging in that high-risk group of people.
Among ethnic groups, Hispanics had the largest rise in cases, with 26 percent more people first diagnosed with the human immunodeficiency virus last year than four years ago. Among whites, the number of new diagnoses last year was 8 percent higher than the number of new diagnoses in 1999. The number of blacks and Asians newly diagnosed in those two years remained stable.
The information, announced by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, comes from 29 states that count all new positive HIV tests each year. The data are considered the best window into the state of the AIDS epidemic nationwide.
Several European countries and Australia also have seen a rise in the number of new HIV diagnoses in gay men in recent years. Experts attribute the trend to two things: a complacency about risky behavior that arose in the wake of lifesaving anti-retroviral therapy, and the coming of age of a new generation of gay men with no memory of the epidemic's early, devastating years.
ATLANTA
Deaths of four children from flu raise concern
Four youngsters have died of the flu in Colorado since last week in what U.S. health officials say could foretell a severe flu season for the country.
The children were 21 months old, 2, 8 and 15. Their deaths startled some health officials because they happened so close together and so early in the season.
Some parts of the country - particularly Colorado, Texas and Nevada - have been hit hard a month earlier than usual.
The flu strain that doctors are seeing is the H3N2 Fujian, part of a class of flu viruses that caused severe outbreaks in the United States in the 1990s.
NEW YORK
Blood clots prompt halt to anemia drug trials
Several clinical trials of a widely used anemia drug have been halted in the last few weeks after patients developed a higher-than-expected number of blood clots, according to doctors and Johnson & Johnson, the seller of the drug.
The development has added more evidence that the drug, Procrit, and perhaps similar drugs sold by Amgen, could pose risks if used more than is necessary to reverse anemia, doctors said. But several doctors said the drugs would not pose a danger if used in appropriate amounts.
Procrit is a version of erythropoietin, or EPO, a natural hormone that stimulates the body to produce oxygen-carrying red blood cells. Procrit and two versions of EPO sold by Amgen, Epogen and Aranesp, have billions of dollars in combined sales annually, making EPO one of the best-selling drugs in the world. EPO is used primarily to treat anemia caused by cancer chemotherapy or kidney failure.
Robert DeLap, vice president for global regulatory affairs at Johnson & Johnson's pharmaceutical development arm, said the trials were aimed at raising levels of hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying molecule in the blood, to levels beyond that needed merely to treat anemia.
The idea was that higher oxygen levels in the blood might make the radiation or chemotherapy being used to treat the patients' cancer more effective.

Notes

HEALTH & SCIENCE


Load-Date: November 27, 2003


End of Document


EDUCATION DIGEST
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 18, 2013 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 373 words
Body


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS > Grant will help manage science data • The National Science Foundation has given the University of Illinois' National Center for Supercomputing Applications more than $10 million to develop software to manage vast amounts of uncurated digital scientific data.
The NCSA said last week it will use the money over five years to develop systems that it says will turn vast amounts of currently unorganized information into usable data.
Initially the software will be aimed at geoscience, biology, engineering and social science.
The NCSA says it will work with faculty at the University of Illinois, Boston University and the University of North Carolina.
HIGHER EDUCATION > International enrollment grows in Missouri • A new report ranks Missouri 12th nationwide in the number of international students enrolled in colleges and universities.
The Institute of International Education said there were 17,300 international students in Missouri during the 2012-2013 academic year. That was up nearly 8 percent from the previous year.
China accounted for more than 33 percent of international students at Missouri colleges and universities last year. About 13 percent were from India and roughly 8 percent came from Saudi Arabia.
The University of Missouri-Columbia had the highest number with nearly 2,500, while Washington University in St. Louis had more than 2,200 students from other countries.
The number of Missouri students studying abroad increased by almost 300, to more than 4,900.
UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI-COLUMBIA > Grant supports scholarships for veterans • The University of Missouri plans to use a $1 million gift to fund academic scholarships for military veterans.
The university announced last week that it received the estate commitment from donors who wanted to remain anonymous. The donors did not attend the university but want the gift to honor Col. Dwight Schannep, a native of Versailles, Mo., who fought in World War II for almost the entire conflict. Schannep died in a military plane crash shortly after the war.
Missouri officials said in a news release that the donors cited the university's full-service Veterans Center, its academic reputation - particularly its journalism schools - and Midwestern values.

Load-Date: November 18, 2013


End of Document


5 MINUTES WITH ...;
MONSANTO'S NEW VP SEES STRATEGY THROUGH WIDE-ANGLE LENS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 8, 2003 Friday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. C5; PROFILE; CHERYL MORLEY; SENIOR VP OF CORPORATE STRATEGY AT MONSANTO CO.
Length: 1339 words
Byline: Rachel Melcer
Body


* Cheryl Morley helps the agrochemical company to find a path amid the complexity of genetically modified food and plant biotechnology.
Cheryl Morley was promoted June 18 to executive vice president and was put in charge of long-term strategy at Monsanto Co.
The company, based in Creve Coeur, has been through a lot in recent years: a series of mergers, acquisitions and spinoffs that left it a $4.7 billion giant in agrochemical and crop biotechnology. Now that the dust has settled, Morley is taking a fresh look at its assets and liabilities, to figure out what it could become.
The lone woman on Monsanto's executive team, Morley takes pride in balancing her work and personal life. And she relishes the challenge ahead.
How will you approach your task?
There is a process that we're putting together now, to analyze and make decisions over the next 12 months. Obviously, we're looking at the competitive framework, alliances or partnerships we could form, the technology we have in-house today, the technology we could acquire in new platforms and how they align with our current business strategy. Do they make it bigger? Do they make it completely different? And what does that mean?
It seems that the company is set on a certain path. Is there an opportunity to choose something different?
We are an agriculture company that is moving toward seeds and biotech traits. But there is an enormous world called plant biotechnology … pharmaceuticals in plants (and) industrials in plants.
So, it's not a closet; it's a ballroom. And the question is, how do you want to dance in that ballroom?
We're unique in that we probably have more ideas, opportunities and platforms than we can handle.
Will the decisions be affected by the debate over genetically modified food? Could it push you away from developing biotech crops?
We have commercialized technology in two of the largest food crops t oday: corn and soybeans. So, to say that we're not going to be in food -- that decision was made a long time ago.
If you're talking about: "Do we expand in food? Do we go further down the chain? Do we do quality-nutritional traits?" That will clearly be part of the decision.
We're working hard on commercial and consumer acceptance. We understand that there are different points of view. There are different regulatory processes and different concepts around the world about food and food culture. It's almost overwhelming.
But I believe that this is probably some of the most important technology in the world. And I am passionate and thrilled to be looking at it, because I think this technology will make a huge difference in the future.
In what sense?
The technology that we've already commercialized has significantly reduced the amount of chemicals on the ground. That's a huge benefit.
And plant biotechnology can play a huge role in delivering very complex pharmaceuticals to consumers, more cost effectively and faster.
I think that's incredible. These are the next level of pharmaceutical therapies for cancer, for arthritis -- big indications.
Why did you go down the pharmaceutical path first, when, typically, the first thing mentioned as a benefit of genetically modified crops is the potential to address world hunger?
We have made huge inroads in transferring technology to the Third World, and there are scientists that will tell you that.
In our business, it's very difficult, because if you talk about feeding the world, there are so many emotional views. But when I talk about pharmaceuticals, it becomes very clear to people what they're going to get. And the debate is not as intense as it is around world hunger.
Do you believe that your options are limited by external factors, such as regulatory concerns and politics?
I'm an optimist. I believe that the benefits of the technology will show themselves over time. And we will work hard with the right parties to answer their questions.
I think we're limited by what we can do, what has customer-consumer value, how much money we have to invest, timing. And, of course, the regulatory process will play into that.
And we're looking at the financial promise of all of what we invest in, as our shareholders would expect.
But I do think we are making incredible progress. Any new technology, I think I've realized over time, doesn't become embraced overnight.
But it's fair to say of technologies -- if they add value -- with patience, diligence, science, data and conversation, they will prevail.
What are the pitfalls of planning for the long haul?
Where people get lost is they focus on what they're doing, versus what's happening. You always have to keep your eyes on the market, what your competitors are doing and what technology is being developed.
As biotech was coming on the scene, there were a lot of people who didn't watch it and didn't believe in it. And it's significantly eroded their businesses. I don't want that to happen to us. So, I've got one eye internally and two eyes on the market.
Technology doesn't happen overnight. So, hopefully, you're right. You've got to invest today for 10 years from now.
How does your role fit in with that of Chief Executive Hugh Grant and the other executives?
My mission is to determine a plan that grows Monsanto. Hugh will be working very closely with me and my team because, as the CEO, a big part of his role is growth and direction of the company.
So, I'm looking forward to that.
I think that as Hugh has formed his (executive) team; he's worked with all of us for a long time. He knows we can work together, and we have an unbelievably open and honest framework.
And we're very clear that we all have the same agenda.
What's that agenda?
We're committed to growing the company under the platform of plant biotechnology. It's nice, because we all really passionately believe in the technology and its promise.
Not blindly so. But I've worked with a lot of people over the years, and I've worked with some incredibly smart people. The difference between successful performance and people who are mediocre is that the successful ones are passionate about what they do. They deeply care.
And they love to learn. And they know what they don't know, and they go after finding out answers. And they are engaging.
We've got a passionate group of executives who all want to work together to make this a very successful company. So, it's fun for me.
Within the company, you're known for making work a fun place to be. Why is that important?
There's so much stress, and we work so hard. I have found that laughter is the absolute best form of stress relief. If you can laugh a couple of times a day, you can really just get the weight of the world off your shoulders for five minutes. It's really therapeutic.
Do you think your leadership style and priorities are different because you're a woman?
I don't know. I think there are some very unique differences between women and men in general; we have to recognize them. I think, in general, women feel more inclusive and … that people should feel good and be happy, but you have to be careful about that.
I look at myself as an individual, and I work really hard. And I can accumulate an enormous amount of stress if I don't find a way to relieve it. As I've been coming up the corporate ladder, I realized people just don't have enough fun.
So, I started small in my little group, and we used to do fun things. And it worked.
I believe that it was probably born a little bit out of my own personal need and a little bit out of the fact that there's probably some gender trait that's more inclusive. I think that it's easy in a large organization to feel isolated if somebody doesn't bring you together.
CHERYL MORLEY
Senior vice president of corporate strategy at Monsanto Co.
Age: 48
Education: Bachelor of science degree in business administration, University of Arizona, 1976.
Family: Lives in Ladue with her husband, David Morley, and their children, Alex and Samantha.
Career: Began as a certified public accountant with Ernst & Young; joined Monsanto in 1983; became president of the animal agriculture group in 1997.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color PHOTO by HUY RICHARD MACH / POST-DISPATCH - In a large organization, Cheryl Morley says, employees can feel isolated. So, she helps to coordinate inclusive activities, such as hot-dog day. "If the organization completes something on time, then we celebrate."

Load-Date: August 10, 2003


End of Document


New rules planned to reduce risk of deadly oil train fires
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 24, 2014 Thursday
ONLINE EDITION


Copyright 2014 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1245 words
Byline:  Associated Press Jacob Barker of the Post-Dispatch contributed to this report.   
Body


WASHINGTON • Responding to a series of fiery train crashes, the government proposed rules Wednesday that would phase out tens of thousands of older tank cars that carry increasing quantities of crude oil and other highly flammable liquids through America's towns and cities.
But many details were put off until later as regulators struggle to balance safety against the economic benefits of a fracking boom that has sharply increased U.S. oil production. Among the issues: What type of tank cars will replace those being phased out, how fast will they be allowed to travel and what kind of braking systems will they need?
Accident investigators have complained for decades that older tank cars, known as DOT-111s, are too easily punctured or ruptured, spilling their contents when derailed. Since 2008, there have been 10 significant derailments in the U.S. and Canada in which crude oil has spilled from ruptured tank cars, often igniting and resulting in huge fireballs. The worst was a runaway oil train that exploded in the Quebec town of Lac-Megantic a year ago, killing 47 people.
Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx said he expects his department to complete final regulations before the end of the year. First, the public and affected industries will have an opportunity to comment on the proposal.
"We are at the dawn of a promising time for energy production in this country," Foxx said. "This is a positive development for our economy and for energy independence, but the responsibilities attached to this production are very serious."
In a report released along with the rules, the Department of Transportation concluded that oil from the Bakken region of North Dakota and Montana, where fracking methods have created an oil boom, is more volatile than is typical for light, sweet crudes.
The oil industry immediately challenged that conclusion. "The best science and data do not support recent speculation that crude oil from the Bakken presents greater-than-normal transportation risks," said American Petroleum Institute President and CEO Jack Gerard. "DOT needs to get this right and make sure that its regulations are grounded in facts and sound science, not speculation."
Rail shipments of crude have skyrocketed from a few thousand carloads a decade ago to 434,000 carloads last year. The Bakken now produces over 1 million barrels per day, and production is increasing.
When St. Louis residents in the Holly Hills neighborhood realized Bakken crude trains were regularly rumbling by near their homes, they brought the issue to the attention of local officials and railroad representatives.
Tim Christian, a Holly Hills resident who is part of the group St. Louis for Safe Trains, said he's happy to see the federal government recognize the safety risk. Already, he said, Union Pacific has taken voluntary measures to try and reroute trains around the neighborhood after residents voiced concerns.
But until the rules are finalized and implemented, he said, some anxiety will remain among homeowners near tracks.
"While we're excited to see that the items on that list are good and smart and great in terms of accepting the recommendations of concerned parties … the question is who pays for it and how quickly can it be implemented," Christian said.
The phase-in period for replacing or retrofitting older tank cars that transport the most volatile types of liquids is shorter than the Canadian government's three-year phased plan. Congress, fearing another Lac-Megantic, has been pressuring regulators to put new safety rules in place as quickly as possible.
The proposal also includes ethanol, which is transported in the same kind of tank cars. From 2006 to 2012, there were seven train derailments in which tank cars carrying ethanol ruptured. Several crashes caused spectacular fires that emergency responders were powerless to put out.
The proposed regulations apply only to trains of 20 or more cars. Crude oil trains from the Bakken are typically 100 cars or more.
The department is weighing three options for replacements. One would be to make cars known as "1232s" the new standard for transporting hazardous liquids. Those cars are a stronger design voluntarily agreed to by the railroad, oil and ethanol industries in 2011. But those cars, which have been in use for several years, have also ruptured in several accidents.
The oil and ethanol industries have been urging White House and transportation officials to retain the 1232 design for new cars. The industries have billions of dollars invested in tens of thousands of tank cars that officials say were purchased with the expectation they would last for decades.
Another option is a design proposed by Association of American Railroads that has a thicker shell, an outer layer to protect from heat exposure, a "jacket" on top of that, and a better venting valve, among other changes. A third design proposed by the department is nearly identical to the one proposed by railroads, but it also has stronger fittings on the top of the car to prevent spillage during a rollover accident at a speed of 9 mph.
The prospects of increased tanker demand sent shares of St. Charles-based tanker maker American Railcar Industries Inc. surging as high as 5.9 percent before closing up 3 percent to $69.72.
Regulators also are weighing whether to limit crude and ethanol trains to a maximum of 40 mph throughout the country, or just in "high-threat" urban areas or areas with populations greater than 100,000 people. A high-threat urban area is usually one or more cities surrounded by a 10-mile buffer zone.
Railroads had already voluntarily agreed to reduce oil train speeds to 40 mph in urban areas beginning July 1. Tank cars - including the newer ones built to a tougher safety standard - have ruptured in several accidents at speeds below 30 mph. Regulators said they're considering lowering the speed limit to 30 mph for trains that aren't equipped with advanced braking systems.
The freight railroad industry had met privately with department and White House officials to lobby for keeping the speed limit at 40 mph in urban areas rather than lowering it. Railroad officials say a 30 mph limit would tie up traffic across the country because other freight wouldn't be able to get past slower oil and ethanol trains.
The department said it is considering three types of braking systems for oil and ethanol trains, but a final decision will depend on what type of tank car design is eventually adopted.
Whatever option regulators settle on, the proposal calls for newly manufactured cars to meet that standard beginning Oct. 1, 2015.
The proposal continues a requirement that railroads transporting at least 1 million gallons of Bakken crude oil notify emergency response commissions ahead of time in states they pass through. Communities from upstate New York to the coast of Washington have complained they're in the dark about when trains pass through and how much oil and ethanol they're transporting.
---
RAIL PROPOSAL
THE PROPOSAL: Department of Transportation will phase out tens of thousands of older tank cars, used for crude oil shipments, that are prone to rupturing.
WHY: Since 2008, there have been 10 significant derailments in the U.S. and Canada.
HOW: The department will require those cars be replaced with tankers built under a new standard effective Oct. 1, 2015.
NOTEWORTHY: The rules also will apply to ethanol shipments.
LIMITATIONS: The proposed regulations apply only to trains of 20 or more cars.

Graphic

 
 FILE - This Nov. 6, 2013, file photo shows a BNSF Railway train hauling crude oil near Wolf Point, Mont. Thousands of older rail tank cars that carry crude oil would be phased out within two years under regulations proposed in response to a series of fiery train crashes over the past year. Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx said the government's testing of crude oil from the Bakken region of North Dakota and Montana shows the oil is on the high end of a range of volatility compared with other crude oils, meaning it's more likely to ignite if spilled. (AP Photo/Matthew Brown, File)  FILE - This Nov. 6, 2013 file photo shows a warning placard on a tank car carrying crude oil near a loading terminal in Trenton, N.D. Thousands of older rail tank cars that carry crude oil would be phased out within two years under regulations proposed in response to a series of fiery train crashes over the past year. Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx said the government's testing of crude oil from the Bakken region of North Dakota and Montana shows the oil is on the high end of a range of volatility compared with other crude oils, meaning it's more likely to ignite if spilled. (AP Photo/Matthew Brown, File) 

Load-Date: July 24, 2014


End of Document


SPACEWALK TRAINING HEAVY ON MUSCLES;
HUBBLE TEAM ASTRONAUTS NOT 'PILLSBURY DOUGHBOYS'
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 10, 1997, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. 09A
Length: 535 words
Byline: Compiled From News Services
Dateline: CAPE CANAVERAL, FLORIDA
Body


The astronauts look like puffy, white gingerbread men as they float out into space from the shuttle's hatch.
The truth is, they're getting chafed and callused inside their cumbersome spacesuits. Every effort is strained, every job exhausting. Hands get sore trying to bend fingers in stiff ski gloves and clenching tools for six hours or more.
But that's what the Hubble Space Telescope team will be doing, after their scheduled liftoff Tuesday aboard the space shuttle Discovery. The shuttle is scheduled to rendezvous with the telescope on Thursday.
A hitch occurred Sunday with an oxygen leak, but space center engineers believed the problem would not delay liftoff, at 2:55 a.m. (St. Louis time) Tuesday. Mission controllers also had to check out the shuttle's fuel cells.
The four astro-mechanics who will work on Hubble have been lifting weights and doing fingertip push-ups and wrist curls for nearly two years. They've also spent more than 100 hours apiece underwater, practicing each step of each six-hour spacewalk.
"My hands have calluses on them . . . that I'll have the rest of my life, just because of the wear of the gloves," said Mark Lee, Hubble's 6-foot, 200-pound lead spacewalker.
Gregory Harbaugh said, "We're all gym rats kind of by nature." He is the smallest of the spacewalkers at 5-feet-11 and 175 pounds. It's a matter of having that extra edge, "so that when we get out there, we are able do this with the greatest ease and the greatest degree of finesse possible."
Lee, Harbaugh, Steven Smith and Joe Tanner are to take four spacewalks - two per man - to install new science instruments, data recorders, pointing equipment and electronics on the $ 2 billion Hubble.
They also will test new mix-and-match suits. NASA wants to standardize its pressurized, 300-pound spacesuits, using more interchangeable, twist-on parts, to fit the multisized occupants of the future international space station.
So much for cozy, floating gingerbread men. Lee said, "You get this impression that you've got some Pillsbury doughboys out there and you can punch on them.
"But if you look at the people as they're getting in, they've got pads all over their body in most cases. Not everyone fits in the suits exactly the same, so people have pads on their elbows or shoulders, their collarbones and their backs, on their knees."
To prepare for delicate work on the telescope in uncomfortable suits in weightlessness, the four astronauts became musclemen, at least from the waist up.
Upper body strength is crucial in spacewalking, especially on a mission requiring the delicate handling of screws and electrical connectors as well as refrigerator-size science instruments worth more than $ 100 million apiece.
Smith, a 6-foot-3 180-pounder, kept a hand-gripping device in his car and on his desk to strengthen his fingers. The 6-foot-2, 185-pound Tanner squeezed a small football as he commuted to and from work.
All the while, the men dutifully avoided such bone-crunching activity as skiing, skydiving, car racing, stunt flying, or rock climbing. Smith even gave up basketball, his passion.
"I've hurt my hands many times over the last 25 years in basketball," Smith explained. "I just sacrificed not playing it."    

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Photo from AP - Astronaut Mark Lee heads into the pool at the Johnson Space Center in Houston to prepare for the Hubble mission. He's practicing for two spacewalks.

Load-Date: February 11, 1997


End of Document


SPOTLIGHT COLUMN
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 12, 1989, SUNDAY, LATE FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10B
Length: 650 words
Body


Barbara Newmark has been sel ected as the new executive director of the Conference on Education. The Conference is a volunteer organization designed to bring citizens and educators together to study and act on issues that promote quality education for children in Missouri. From 1983-87, Newmark directed the Conference's statewide task force on the education profession and was vice president of its board of directors. She is recognized as an authority in the area of local bond issues and tax levy campaigns and developed a study for the Clayton School District that has become a model for other districts.  Alice Warren, associate dean for humanities at Forest Park Community College, has been selected to participate in the Leaders Program, an international leadership training program for women administrators at two-year colleges. The program covers supervion, human relations, planning and budgeting, organizational transformation and discussions with national experts on the issues confronting two-year colleges.  Jack Ingrum has been appointed chairman of the new computer science, technology and industrial education department of Lincoln University in Jefferson City. Ingrum joined the university in 1982 as an assistant professor. He previously headed the department of computer science and data processing at the university.  Paul J. McKee Jr., chairman and chief executive officer of Paric Corp., has been appointed general chairman of the ''30 Days of Fitness'' program of the National Council on Youth Leadership, a national non-profit organization based in St. Louis. The program is designed to provide leadership experience to high school juniors.
McKee has been a member of the boards of directors of the Regional Commerce & Growth Association, Christian Hospital Development Corp.  and the Academy of the Visitation. In addition, he was instrumental in developing videos for Students Against Drunk Driving (SADD).  Lela DeToye, assistant professor of education at Webster University, has been appointed a member of the Conference on English Education, a group of the National Council of Teachers of English. DeToye will serve as a member on the group's commission set up to find solutions to problems facing English and language-arts educators as they prepare future teachers. She will also serve on the subcommittee on transition to teaching.  Donald N. Bryant, chairman of the Bryant Group, has been elected president of the board of directors of the Herbert Hoover Boys Club. The vice presidents elected are Adrienne Cuffie, a civic volunteer; Richard Grote, president of Grote Financial Futures; and Ted Hume, president of National Automotive & Casualty Insurance Co. John Mackey, vice president of Pet Inc., was elected secretary, and Judge Theodore McMillian of the 8th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals was elected treasurer. The new members are John Johnson, Robert Fulstone, Emmet Smith, George Scherer, Thomas Kavanaugh and Lawrence Brody.  Jacquelyn C. Harris, a teacher in the St. Louis public school system, has been appointed Missouri state leader for this year's National Council of Teachers of English program. The program is designed to honor students, teachers and schools for quality literary magazines. As state leader, Harris will coordinate the competition and appoint judges to evaluate magazines entered by high schools, junior high schools and middle schools in the state.  Last year, 25 schools got ''highest awards'' for their magazines.  Gregory B. Freeman, assistant city editor of the Post-Dispatch, has been elected president of the Greater St. Louis Association of Black Journalists.  Freeman has been a member of the newspaper's staff for nine years. He also serves as regional director of the National Association of Black Journalists and as vice president of the St. Louis chapter of the Society of Professional Journalists, formerly Sigma Delta Chi.


Graphic

 
Photo; PHOTO HEADSHOTS of Barbara Newmark, Alice Warren, Jack Ingrum and Paul J.  McKee Jr.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document


TALKING WITH...CHILD DEVELOPMENT COUNSELOR JULIE SPACKMAN RESIGNING YOURSELF; TO BEING ORGANIZED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 12, 1990, MONDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE; Pg. 4D
Length: 1027 words
Body


First of a two-part interview on coping with stressful moments in everyday family life.  (SERIES 1st) THIS was a perfect morning.  This morning, your 3-year-old wanted Berry Bumpers, the strawberry cereal that's shaped like a little red car, for breakfast. If you hadn't had any, he would have been inconsolable. But you did, tra-la.  This morning your older son's hairdo, a sort of helmet with a fringe of becoming corkscrew curls at the neckline, required a bottle and a half of Diamond Hold hair mousse to architect. And who had the goo? Right, you.  You even had your daughter's science project data, weekly temperature readings from the years 1890, 1895 and 1900.  And the morning went so smoothly that you arrived at work actually ready to work instead of ready to be treated for trauma. You have a) a housekeeper b) elves c) a lifetime of study of great military tacticians d) resigned yourself to being organized.  Many of us resist being organized the way we would resist an alien culture being imposed on us. We are used to hurtling from one crisis to the next and dissolving into occasional tears. Being relentlessly well-prepared seems so unlike us it would require a chromosomal reconfiguration. Besides, it takes so much time when we're so busy being hysterical.  But after enough devastating mornings ''when before me rises up either murder or madness'' or organization, the latter begins to look more appealing.  Childhaven, an education center in St. Louis, sponsors a ''Brown Bag'' series of lectures on stormy periods of family life and how to ease them.
The suggestions-and-sympathy series, underwritten by Southwestern Bell, contains practical tips for defusing the potentially explosive weekday morning.  ''And the first thing we advise,'' says Julie Spackman, director of Childhaven and a child development counselor, ''is to buy a notebook or datebook.'' Q. Get organized?  A. Take a survey of the activities for the week. Make a list. We recommend starting on the weekend before. Gather your children around and ask them what's coming up. Has someone got Brownies? The uniform will need to be ready.  Pencil it in. Does someone need to take something to school like poster board?  Pencil it in.  Q. What about teen-age memory lapses?  A. You have to probe sometimes. ''You told me about a science project. Are you going to need to go to the library?'' If a child fails to give you advance warning about what he needs, you've got a couple of choices: do your last-minute conjuring trick, make the child responsible for doing the chore since he didn't remember to tell you, or just let the natural consequences for not doing it occur. In other words, the child doesn't have whatever is needed and has to tell the teacher. It's a very delicate decision. There's a thin line between rescuing the child and perpetuating the cycle.  Q. They need to be organized, too?  A. There should be understandings about when schedule additions need to be discussed. When your child asks if so-and-so can spend the night, it should not be a last-minute thing with so-and-so at his shoulder. You should not feel like you're being forced to submit to a gunman. Specify that overnights should be brought up two or three days before.  To make it easier for your child to plan, get a family calendar and put it in a prominent place with a pencil at the ready.  Teach teen-agers how to use the washer and dryer so when they need a rare and precious pair of jeans at the last minute, they can wash them themselves.  It makes the house rules easier to enforce if you make them as independent as possible. ''Either you tell me you need it in advance, or you do it yourself.'' Get your spouse on the program. I work very hard communicating scheduling with my husband. Who has the early morning meeting? The other one should make plans and space to be primarily responsible for the kids.  Praise everybody for thinking in advance. Say how much easier it has made things for you. And conversely if someone gets up grouchy and sparks a morning meltdown, talk about that. But do it later in the day. ''It makes everyone so tense when you are in that sort of mood. What can we do about it?'' Q. An army marches on its stomach. Any tips for making breakfast less of a survival test? A. Combat readiness. Don't run out of the favorite breakfast foods. Think how you'd feel if you ran out of coffee. It would mess up your whole day.  Again, plan ahead so the easy foods are at hand.  Remember, breakfast foods don't have to be traditional to be nutritious.  Cold pizza and pasta are fine; so is peanut butter and jelly.  You lower your stress level if you lower your expectation level. Don't hold in front of yourself the image of your grandmother making muffins in the pre-dawn darkness. Save elaborate breakfasts for the weekend when the whole family can be involved.  For kids who enjoy breakfast, you can get them dressed quicker if you insist that they be brushed and washed before they get to eat.  For morning grouches, first of all, have what they like on hand. It won't transform them into a ray of sunshine but it will forestall a blacker-than-normal mood. Second, try waking them up at a slightly earlier or later time. We all sleep in 90-minute cycles. You might be waking the grouch up at the deepest point of descent. Third, try giving them a radio with a snooze alarm so they can wake up in stages.  For slowpoke eaters, the younger ones, you might try getting a timer and giving a sticker whenever the child finishes on schedule. You want to be sure to give the child enough time to eat though, so check with your pediatrician.  You're not trying to make them into career food gulpers and rushers; that's what you're trying to avoid.  The thing you want to always be asking yourself is whether you are setting a good example by preparing for each week or if you're still always on the edge of an avoidable crisis. It's not that hard. You don't have to be a Machine Intelligence to make your household run relatively smoothly. You don't need a firm of management consultants. You just need to get a pencil and a datebook and start.  Next week: Nighttime rituals.


Graphic

 
Photo; PHOTO Headshot of Julie A. Spackman.

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document


Trumpeter swans' population comeback on full display at the confluence
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 27, 2017 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 931 words
Byline:  By Bryce Gray  St. Louis Post-Dispatch   
Body


WEST ALTON - Against a horizon broken by transmission lines and the occasional smokestack, amid the steady buzz of 60-mph traffic along U.S. Highway 67, the bottomlands near the confluence of the Mississippi and Missouri rivers may not seem like a sought-after natural oasis - especially during gray, winter months.
But things look differently if you're a trumpeter swan, or a devoted birdwatcher drawn to observe the species, beginning this time of year.
A record 1,089 of the birds have already returned to the area's marshy expanses for the winter, migrating from their northern habitat ranges in places such as Wisconsin, Minnesota or even Canada, based on a count completed last week.
That tops last year's record of 1,022 counted at the Riverlands Migratory Bird Sanctuary in West Alton, helping cement the site's status as home of the largest number of wintering trumpeters in the interior of the United States. The numbers represent a striking turnaround for a species that was once nearly hunted to extinction across the U.S.
With wingspans approaching eight feet, trumpeters rank as North America's largest waterfowl. That majestic size makes them a favorite of regional birders.
"The bigger the birds are, the more fun they are," said Pat Lueders, a retiree who, since 2011, has led the Great Rivers Trumpeter Swan Watch, a volunteer group that counts the number of swans roosting at Riverlands throughout the winter. "You're not looking for teeny sparrows in the grass."
Lueders and other birders haven't always had so many trumpeters to count, as the species' recent population surge took a long time to materialize.
Decades ago, hunting nearly wiped out the species in the United States, save for some remote populations in the Rocky Mountains and Alaska, explained Charlie Deutsch, an Army Corps of Engineers wildlife biologist based at Riverlands. But by the 1970s and '80s, reintroduction programs took root, including in a number of states in the Upper Midwest.
By the winter of 1991 and 1992, five of those reintroduced trumpeters found their way to Riverlands.
"I was here when the first group of five showed up," Deutsch said. "The idea that we have thousands here on a given day (today), it's a cool conservation story."
It wasn't a sure thing that the first reintroduced birds, raised as hatchlings without their biological parents, would know to head south in the winter.
"They raised them and crossed their fingers about what they would do," said Jean Favara, a conservation manager at the Audubon Center at Riverlands.
Not all birds figured it out in the early years. Some perished up north.
But Favara says others showed an "innate ability" to learn to migrate - something they've done at Riverlands in growing numbers as their population has risen over time.
Only over the last decade or so did trumpeters' winterly totals at Riverlands climb into the hundreds, and just in the last few years did it leap again to approach - and then exceed - a peak of about 1,000 swans.
But once they find suitable wintering habitat, such as that at the confluence, they're typically return customers, demonstrating "site fidelity" throughout their lifespan, according to Favara. Trumpeters also mate for life and migrate as a family unit, bringing their offspring - known as cygnets - with them.
The marshland habitat at Riverlands, Favara and Deutsch say, provides the birds with both food and plenty of areas where water can shield them from potential predators.
Deutsch thinks the area has emerged as the swans' preferred winter destination thanks to its location near the confluence of three major rivers - including the Illinois River - and because it offers several large tracts of restored habitat.
"Birds loosely use waterways as migration corridors," Deutsch said. "They'd probably travel this corridor regardless, but would probably bypass us otherwise."
Those attributes help draw many other birds to the area, as well, with Riverlands supporting the largest number of bird species of any place in Missouri, according to eBird, a site run by Cornell University that catalogs crowd-sourced observations by birdwatchers around the globe.
That local biodiversity peaks in the winter.
"We probably have the most variety of birds in the winter season because of the waterfowl that comes through," Favara said.
Although migration tendencies for many kinds of birds are facing potential disruption thanks to forces such as climate change, local experts say there have not been clearly discernible shifts for trumpeters or other species at Riverlands - either in terms of timing or geographic distribution.
"There certainly are changes in species' behavior, distribution (and) migration that are likely influenced by climate change," said Tom Bonnot, a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Missouri's School of Natural Resources, focused on how changes to climate and landscape affect wildlife populations. "We are starting to see pretty comprehensive evidence that, across species, distributions are starting to shift northward."
The reams of "citizen science" data compiled on eBird and elsewhere by dedicated birders such as Lueders will be a valuable tracking and comparison tool to see if those shifts eventually affect trumpeters or other birds at Riverlands, as the National Audubon Society projects.
"We'll find that out maybe as the years go by," Lueders said.
"Most people are doing it for fun," said Frank La Sorte, a research associate at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology, describing eBird. "But it's providing this really rich scientific tool that has tremendous scientific potential."

Graphic

 
 Trumpeter swans take flight from Heron Pond near the confluence of the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers in West Alton on Tuesday, Nov. 21, 2017. Area watchers have logged greater numbers of the North America's largest water fowl species. Photo by Christian Gooden, cgooden@post-dispatch.com  Trumpeter swans roost in Heron Pond near the confluence of the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers before surise in West Alton on Tuesday, Nov. 21, 2017. Area watchers have logged greater numbers of the North America's largest water fowl species. Photo by Christian Gooden, cgooden@post-dispatch.com  Bird expert Pat Lueders, (second from right), counts a large flock of trumpeter swans with volunteer counters Paul Moffett, (right) of Florissant and Joel Rurik, (left), of St. Louis , on Tuesday, Nov. 21, 2017, at Heron Pond near the confluence of the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers in West Alton. Area watchers have logged greater numbers of the North America's largest water fowl species. Photo by Christian Gooden, cgooden@post-dispatch.com  A Trumpeter swan with a number collar takes flight from Heron Pond near the confluence of the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers in West Alton on Tuesday, Nov. 21, 2017. Area watchers have logged greater numbers of the North America's largest water fowl species. Photo by Christian Gooden, cgooden@post-dispatch.com 

Load-Date: December 2, 2017


End of Document


ASTRONAUTS TAKE LAST WALK TO FINISH HUBBLE REPAIRS;
$ 3 BILLION TELESCOPE IS SET TO CUT LOOSE FROM SHUTTLE DISCOVERY TODAY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 25, 1999, Saturday, FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A5
Length: 335 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: SPACE CENTER, HOUSTON
Body


Two astronauts ventured out on a Christmas Eve walk in space Friday to finish fixing the Hubble Space Telescope by installing a new radio transmitter and a digital recorder.
Smarter than ever after a new computer was added earlier this week, the $ 3 billion telescope will be cut loose from space shuttle Discovery today.
Steven Smith and John Grunsfeld floated out into the shuttle cargo bay for the third and final spacewalk of the mission.
"Ah, John, another beautiful day outside," Smith called out.
They quickly hooked up an electronic unit to the pointing system, then replaced Hubble's broken radio transmitter. The instrument stopped working last year, and NASA had to rely on a backup transmitter to relay science data.
NASA never expected the radio transmitters to break, so the connectors were not made to be handled with the astronauts' bulky gloves. Engineers redesigned the replacement unit and devised a special tool to remove and install the small connectors.
Even with the tool, it was tedious work. Grunsfeld had to rest his hands while unplugging the old transmitter.
Hubble's old reel-to-reel recorder, on the other hand, was meant to be replaced. The new solid state recorder has no reels, no tapes and no moving parts, and can hold 10 times as much data.
In addition to installing the two instruments, Smith and Grunsfeld had to hang steel shields around the base of the 9-year-old telescope to guard against the sun's damaging rays.
All equipment installed on the first two spacewalks has tested well. As a result, NASA is confident that when Hubble's eye opens and begins scrutinizing the universe again - an action scheduled for the second week of January - everything will work just fine.
Because of the mission's late start, managers shortened Discovery's flight from 10 to eight days in order to get the shuttle back with a few days to spare before New Year's Eve. Although engineers believe NASA's computers are Y2K-compatible, they do not want to take any chances.
 
A Monday landing is planned.

Graphic

 
PHOTO Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Astronauts John Grunsfeld (on robot arm) and Steven Smith gather equipment from Discovery's cargo bay during the third spacewalk on Friday to fix the Hubble Space Telescope.

Load-Date: December 25, 1999


End of Document


BRIEFS; GERMANY TRAINS COLLIDE NEAR BERLIN; 3 KILLED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 10, 1993, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A; BRIEFS/NATION/WORLD COLUMN
Length: 673 words
Body


Two trains carrying 1,300 Easter holiday travelers crashed head-on Friday on the outskirts of Berlin, killing at least three people and injuring 16.  Authorities feared more victims might be in a crushed first-class car.  Hours after the wreck in a forest near Wannsee station, rescuers were trying to cut and pry their way into the car.  The president of the railway, Werner Remmert, said the cause of the crash was under investigation. But he said the outbound Berlin-Stuttgart express was not supposed to have been on the track.  AP +++++
MOSCOW 12 Accused Of Coup Plot Face Trial Twelve men who were once among the most powerful in the Soviet Union go on trial Wednesday on charges that they plotted the coup attempt of August 1991.  Two of the defendants - former Vice President Gennady Yanayev and Politburo member Oleg Shenin - said Tthis week that former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev secretly pushed them to declare emergency rule and then backed out.  Gorbachev denies the accusation and has agreed to testify at the non-jury, military trial.  AP +++++
NATION NASA Shuttle Maneuvered To Measure Rays Discovery's pilot twirled the shuttle high above Earth on Friday for solar energy measurements needed by scientists studying Earth's withering ozone layer.  As those measurements streamed down to scientists, NASA struggled for the second day to fix a data-relay problem involving a prime ozone monitor.  Engineers traced the trouble to the shuttle's antenna.  "Currently, we are losing no science data . . . it is not an impact," said Randy Stone, mission operations director.
AP +++++
TEXAS 6 Cultists Died In Siege, Member Says A Branch Davidian cult member told negotiators that six followers of David Koresh had been killed in the siege with federal agents that began 41 days ago in Waco, the FBI said Friday.  Koresh's deputy, Steve Schneider of the Branch Davidian group, said five men and one woman were dead. Schneider did not say whether they were killed in the shootout or died from complications, the FBI said.  Reuters +++++
WASHINGTON U.S. Awaits Lawyers' Trial Outcome Attorney General Janet Reno will await the outcome of New York's trial of Washington lawyers Clark Clifford and Robert Altman before deciding whether to bring federal charges against them in the BCCI international banking scandal.  Clifford's trial is not scheduled to begin until October, and his attorney says Clifford, 86, won't recover from his recent open-heart surgery until the end of the year.  Reno said Clifford and Altman could face the same or even tougher federal charges than were originally brought against them if the state prosecution on similar charges did not lead to a conviction.  AP +++++
WASHINGTON Japanese Indicted In Bombing Of USO A Japanese Red Army member was indicted Friday in the 1988 bombing of the USO Club in Naples, Italy, which killed five people and injured 18, the Justice Department announced.  The bombing took place on April 14, 1988, one day before the two-year anniversary of the U.S. military raid on Libya. The 10-count indictment, handed up by a federal grand jury in Washington, charged Junzo Okudaira with carrying out the attack.  Okudaira's whereabouts are unknown.  Reuters +++++
CABLE TV Operators To Appeal Access Ruling Cable television operators will appeal a federal court ruling requiring one-third of their channels to be reserved for commercial and public TV broadcasters, an industry spokeswoman said Friday.  A three-judge panel of the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia ruled 2-1 Thursday against the cable industry's complaint that a new federal cable law violated their First Amendment rights.  When few original cable shows existed, the cable companies depended on broadcast television for programming, but new cable networks are being created so rapidly that competition for space on the dial is tight. Smaller broadcasters who are not affiliated with a network have feared they would be dropped by cable companies if the law did not require that they be carried.  AP


Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo By Reuters - Firefighters inspecting the wreckage of two trains involved in a fatal crash Friday near Berlin.

Load-Date: October 7, 1993


End of Document


Cardinals Insider: Correa eyes future Cardinals
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 7, 2015 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS; Pg. C6
Length: 1713 words
Byline:  By Derrick Goold St. Louis Post-Dispatch 
Body


New to the job and new to that many days on the road, Cardinals scouting director Chris Correa estimates he saw about 125 games this spring and spent enough time up in the air between them to log 75,000 air miles, roughly enough to circumnavigate the globe three times.
But before he got behind the wheel of the Cardinals' draft, Correa felt it was important to get in a car and go for a drive with most of the team's scouts. There was as much to learn in a bucket seat beside a scout as there was a bleacher seat at their next destination.
"I wasn't trying to be just where other scouting directors were," Correa explained. "I feel like I had to throw myself into this. What I was trying to do was make sure I saw the top players, sure, but also to make sure I spent a lot of time with our scouts. There is no substitute for once in a while getting into a car with a scout, driving, and just talking. Talking about players. Talking about the job. Talking about how we can get better as a group."
The trips are over. The real ride is about to start.
The Cardinals' amateur scouts converged in St. Louis on Friday to begin the final prep for the First-Year Player Draft, which begins Monday night. Correa will be running his first draft, inheriting the helm from Dan Kantrovitz, who followed Jeff Luhnow. The success the Cardinals have had drafting and developing talent is apparent in their current titles: Luhnow is the general manager of the first-place Houston Astros and Kantrovitz is an assistant general manager in Oakland's brain trust. Under the overall guidance of general manager John Mozeliak the Cardinals have used the draft to nourish what Mozeliak calls "perpetual success."
Seven of the 13 players who appeared in Thursday's victory at Dodger Stadium were Cardinals draft picks. And four of the five starters currently in the rotation were drafted or signed as an international amateur by the Cardinals. The one who wasn't - John Lackey - was acquired from Boston for two players, yes, drafted by the Cardinals. For their business model, the draft must be the aquifer that provides talent - by giving or getting.
The Cardinals select 23rd overall and have four more selections in the first 105. Due to a competitive balance pick they lucked into, the reigning division champs have one more pick than any other National League Central team before the fourth round. They have two more than the archrival Cubs.
The Cardinals used their first six picks last season to take pitchers, four from colleges. The Cardinals' two previous first-round selections were college pitchers, Michael Wacha (2012) and Marco Gonzales (2013). The Cardinals ladle often into that well. It's also the shallowest talent pool in this year's draft, thinned further by injury concerns.
In this draft, with few headliners, the talent available in the first round's middle third could be similar to the players available from Nos. 20-40, where the Cardinals have two picks.
"I understand the uncertainty of picking at the top of the draft, but at the same time my message to the scouts has been that there are dozens of big leaguers that come out of every draft," Correa said. "Could be a lot more than that. The point being that there are a lot of big leaguers that come out of every draft, and this year's is no different. Maybe it's a few fewer than possible. That doesn't mean we won't have multiple opportunities to select future major leaguers, and that's going to be our focus, not whining about the lack of talent."
The Cardinals, per usual, have been tied to several college pitchers, like Louisville's righthander Kurt Funkhouser. The same spyglass that the Cardinals have used to spot projectable and predictable traits in college pitchers can be trained on college position players, and if there's a spot where the 2015 MLB Draft is above average it's with college shortstops. Eight college shortstops rank in the first 67 of Baseball America's Top 500 draft prospects. Two shortstops, Florida high schooler Brendan Rogers and Vanderbilt's Dansby Swanson, top Baseball America's list and either could go No. 1.
At the Cardinals' first two picks, more than one heralded shortstop should be available. Arizona's Kevin Newman and Florida's Richie Martin are considered first-round talents, and both have Cape Cod League success, something the Cardinals value. Newman won back-to-back batting titles in the wood bat league, finishing this past summer with a .380 average, a .463 slugging percentage, and more walks (18) than strikeouts (nine). Right behind in the batting race was Martin with more hits, 59 to 46. Martin hit .364 with a .469 slugging percentage. Later in the draft is Alabama's Mikey White, who has a solid track record in college and the Cape.
In the outfield, Cincinnati switch-hitter Ian Happ slugged .503 with a .936 OPS at the Cape.
The Cardinals' system has a gap where high-ceiling position prospects and power are missing. The Cardinals have intriguing shortstops at the lower levels, like Edmundo Sosa and Oscar Mercado, but this draft's relative strength reflects the Cardinals' relative need.
"I don't think we want to buck our system and start drafting for need, so to speak," Correa said. "It might be the kind of thing where with some picks it's a tiebreaker. Say we have two players that we like equally and one is a pitcher and one is a bat, I could see that might be a consideration. But if there is a player who we've got a lot higher than the other options in terms of the value he's going to bring for the cost, we're going to take that player."
Early this past week, Correa sat with Mozeliak and chairman Bill DeWitt Jr. and the three ran through a three-round dress rehearsal, illustrating potential directions to go.
On Friday and Saturday, Correa intended to use the meetings with the scouts to rank the top players in the draft from their views alone. Once that list was complete at about five rounds deep, Correa wanted to set the team's final rankings by integrating the other information available - analytical analyses, medical information, personality evaluations. The Cardinals, for example, have baked-in a way to judge higher slugging percentages in college because of the flat-seamed baseballs used in most competitions this spring.
Correa, who came to baseball with a psychology and data science background, said this spring he's tried to "look at the world through two lenses." The first was focused by the ride-alongs with the scouts.
The second was through the Cardinals' analytics.
"We have a very data-driven approach," Correa said, "and I'm not going to shy away from that."
Due to bonus values assigned by the commissioner's office to each pick in the draft, the Cardinals have a bonus cap of $7,387,600. How they measure players internally dovetails with baseball's slotting system. The Cardinals have, for years, assigned a dollar figure to amateur and pro players. The same system is used to evaluate international players as domestic players, and Correa has been involved in applying the same approach to minor-league prospects involved in trades. By keeping the system constant, the Cardinals feel they have a way to compare players in trades or amateurs against the draft pick slot. What the Cardinals are looking for in each case is the same: value beyond the cost.
Medical concerns, like those that follow high-end pitcher Brady Aiken, last year's unsigned No. 1 overall pick, cut into that international valuation, and the Cardinals rarely see top talent with an injury risk fall to the value they've assigned. The Cardinals' first pick, No. 23, has a suggested bonus of $2.1 million. They may go over that to sign the player, but they certainly want their internal measure to be higher.
"You're trying to maximize the difference," Correa said. "To be upfront, I don't think it's right to go into a draft with a specific strategy. I think my job is to be prepared for a lot of different possibilities. Given where we pick, the distribution of talent, it could be very different. I couldn't tell you right now if we're going to go straight slot with everybody or if we're going to save or go above."
But a specific outcome is always there.
Like scouts with Correa, the draft has taken the Cardinals places.
They do not wish for a detour.
"The most exciting part of the job is to walk away from a ballpark after scouting a player and think, ‘You know what? We might get that guy in our organization. He might do some things for the major league team years down the road,'" Correa said. "I think every scout experiences that. I'm fortunate being in this position because I got to see a lot of the top talent and I had that feeling over and over again. That's always fun."
---
DRAFT KINGS
A look back at the Cardinals' selections in the last decade of drafts, seven of them run by current Houston GM Jeff Luhnow and three by current Oakland assistant GM Dan Kantrovitz. The draft recaps include any player taken in the top 30 and the overall Wins Above Replacement (WAR) of the given draft along with its WAR leader.
LUHNOW ERA
YEAR PICK PLAYER, POS Club-Level
2005 28 Colby Rasmus, OF HOU-MLB 30 Tyler Greene, SS PHI-AAA (2014) Total Draft WAR: 17.0 (Rasmus, 14.1 WAR)
2006 30 Adam Ottavino, RHP COL-MLB Total WAR: 32.0 (Jon Jay, 2nd rd., 11.5)
2007 18 Pete Kozma, SS STL-MLB Total WAR: -0.6 (D. Descalso, 3rd rd., 0.8)
2008 13 Brett Wallace, 3B SD-AAA Total WAR: 9.4 (Lance Lynn, 1st supp., 8.9)
2009 19 Shelby Miller, RHP ATL-MLB Total WAR: 31.5 (M. Carpenter, 13th rd., 12.3)
2010 25 Zack Cox, 3B MIA-AA Total WAR: -1.5 WAR (John Gast, 6th rd., -0.1)
2011 22 Kolten Wong, 2B STL-MLB Total WAR: 6.6 (Wong, 3.9)
KANTROVITZ ERA
2012 19 Michael Wacha, RHP STL-MLB 23 James Ramsey, OF CLE-AAA Total WAR: 5.0 (Wacha, 5.0)
2013 19 Marco Gonzales, RHP STL-AAA 28 Rob Kaminsky, LHP STL-High-A Total WAR: 0.3 (Gonzales, 0.3)
2014 27 Luke Weaver, RHP STL-High-A Total WAR: No MLB debuts.
The WAR statistics represents the number of wins a player has added to the team's success above that of a replacement player, roughly the equivalent of a Class AAA journeyman. These figures are cumulative. So, the more time a player has in the majors the more opportunity he has to add or subtract from his WAR.
Sources: Post-Dispatch research, Baseball-Reference.com.- Derrick Goold

Graphic

 
 Florida's Florida infielder Richie Martin (12) can't get the ball in hand as Florida State's Ben DeLuzio (21) slides safe into second base after getting a double during the 5th inning of an NCAA college baseball regional tournament in Gainesville, Fla., Friday, June 5, 2015. (AP Photo/Phil Sandlin)  

Load-Date: June 8, 2015


End of Document


NASA EXULTS, HOPES HUBBLE MAY SOON LOOK BACK TO THE FUTURE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 8, 1993, WEDNESDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 449 words
Dateline: SPACE CENTER, HOUSTON
Body


Even as NASA officials exulted that "we won the division and we are now in the playoffs," they cautioned Tuesday against taking success for granted in their repairs of the Hubble Space Telescope.
The result of the repairs should be a telescope that will live up to the original promise of getting crisp images and detailed scientific data from the faintest and oldest bodies in the universe.
NASA was embarrassed not long after the April 1990 launching of the Hubble when it had to admit that the main lens, 94.5 inches in diameter, had been ground to the wrong specifications, leaving the telescope blurry-eyed.
Half of that problem was corrected with the installation of replacement parts in the mission's third spacewalk, a 6-hour, 47-minute operation by astronauts Story Musgrave and Jeff Hoffman. The walk was completed at 4:23 a.m. Tuesday (St. Louis time).
Even with that done, officials went to great lengths, more than halfway through the repair mission, to lower expectations.
"I have to keep emphasizing that it will be six to eight weeks until we have the ability to measure whether we have total success, partial success, or whatever," said Hubble's program scientist, Edward Weiler.
"Let's not declare total success."
Musgrave and Hoffman installed a new camera whose mirrors compensate for the flaws created by the telescope's misshapen main mirror.
A second team, Kathy Thornton and Tom Akers, is set to depart the shuttle Endeavour to install a tricky device called COSTAR, which intercepts incoming light and corrects it before it hits three other optical instruments on the Hubble.
The mirrors are in a 7-foot-high box, the size of a telephone booth, that weighs 640 pounds. The COSTAR will be slid into a space now occupied by a high-speed photometer. That instrument, which provided only 2 percent of the Hubble's capability in collecting science data, will be brought back to Earth.
After the mission in space ends, it will take six to eight weeks to orient the telescope, recalibrate its instruments, fine-tune the position of the new mirrors and get the photograph that astronomers call "first light."
Hubble's guidance and power systems were replaced during two earlier spacewalks, on Sunday and Monday.
"Every day it's becoming more and more like, 'Can you top this?' " Mission Control told the astronauts as they wrapped up the third spacewalk.
Even with its flaws, Hubble has made a variety of important contributions to astrononomy.
Among its discoveries, the telescope provided the most detailed look yet at a comet hurtling toward a collision next July with Jupiter, and took the first pictures of what is suspected to be a black hole at the center of the most distant known galaxy.

Load-Date: December 9, 1993


End of Document


ON LINE HUBBLE TELESCOPE'S BALKY ANTENNA IS FINALLY ON THE JOB
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 1, 1990, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 485 words
Body


GODDARD SPACE FLIGHT CENTER, Md. (AP) - NASA engineers got the $1.5 billion Hubble Space Telescope working again Monday after freeing a movable antenna that had jammed after brushing against an electrical cable.  ''We are still investigating it to understand how did this really happen, why did it happen, why didn't we catch it?'' said Jean Olivier, one of the top National Aeronautics and Space Administration officials on the project.  ''We're not through with that investigation.'' By this evening, the telescope should be in a condition where calibration and other normal start-up work can begin, said Mike Harrington, director of the troubleshooting team.  The antenna jammed on Friday when engineers were running it through its paces. Sensing something wrong and trying to prevent damage, the telescope's computer shut down the whole system. The telescope's two high-gain antennas are designed to transmit science data to two orbiting relay satellites at high speeds - up to the equivalent of a 30-volume encyclopedia in 42 minutes.  ''For a while we were puzzled as to the data we were receiving from the spacecraft and therefore lacked a clear understanding physically of what the problem was with the high gains,'' Olivier said. ''All that has significantly changed.'' Detective work by NASA and its contractor teams led to an understanding of the problem.  While studying pre-launching photographs of the telescope nestled in the cargo bay of space shuttle Discovery, an engineer noticed that an inch-thick electrical cable on the back of the antenna was slightly out of position.
Olivier said the length of the cable was determined by computer simulations and turned out to be an inch or so too long. The antenna movement could not be tested on Earth because the motors are not powerful enough to move the antenna in the presence of gravity.  One engineer went to a toy store, bought a kit that included plastic sticks and joints and built a model of the antenna using the kit and a piece of lamp cord.  ''We determined that there was a proper motion that we should carry this antenna through to bring it carefully away, in the right direction so it wouldn't upset the control system,'' Olivier said. ''We successfully did that and we are all relieved to know that our theories were correct.'' The first test image from the telescope had been expected by today but has been delayed until the weekend, Harrington said.  The telescope, named after astronomer Edwin Hubble, was carried into space by space shuttle Discovery and released into a 381-mile high orbit last Wednesday. Its mission is to look at emissions that date back 14 billion years, when the universe was young.  Meanwhile, NASA said Discovery, which landed on Sunday at Edwards Air Force Base, sustained only minimal damage to its heat-protecting tiles. It is scheduled to be returned to the Kennedy Space Center at the end of the week.


Graphic

 
Photo; PHOTO (COLOR) by AP … Into Position … The port solar panel on the Hubble Space Telescope as it was deployed after the telescope's release from the shuttle Discovery last Wednesday. The shuttle's robot arm is holding the telescope about 381 miles above the Earth. Story on Page 7A.  (NOTE: photo ran on page 1A) PHOTO by AP … Mike Harrington of Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., examining a model of the Hubble Space Telescope on Monday.

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document


THE ERA OF BIG GOVERNMENT IS BACK
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 24, 1998, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL, Pg. B7, COMMENTARY COLUMN
Length: 909 words
Byline: Deecy Stephens Gray
Body


Good economic times bring complacency. When this election year began, the key question for each party was (1) how to intensify its base and (2) how to appeal to the huge uninterested middle. In only a month, things have changed.
The presidential scandal has Americans temporarily refocused. But when the dust settles, the steady, less juicy, unavoidable decision will be the issue that affects all of us daily: How much government do we want in our lives? 1998 will offer a clear choice.
Long before his personal problems became public, President Bill Clinton had changed his political plan. In 1997, he announced that the "era of big government was over." Now in 1998 he has announced that "government can now be progressive." In other words, the era of big government is back.
In 1997, he used the salami-slice approach of small, inconspicuous social programs - targeted tax cuts, V-chips, and school uniforms. In 1998, he is directing big proposals to satisfy the neglected and always demanding base of the Democratic Party. The State of the Union speech said so clearly. It is hard to find an area in which Clinton is not asking for more money for more federal programs. Some examples:
His reaction to coping with the Information Age: more money for Head Start, Pell Grants and Hope Scholarships. (Have you tried to get through the bureaucracy to see if you are even eligible? Like targeted tax cuts, it never applies to you.)
His reply to solving Asia's financial problem: "a renewed commitment to the International Monetary Fund." This means more money from us for yet another incompetent international organization with post-WWII answers for 1990s problems.
His solution to education problems: 100,000 more teachers and 5,000 new schools. This means the federal government is going to be even more involved in our local schools. This will create more bureaucracy and add members to the teachers' union.
His solution to Medicare's severe financial problems: Expand the program. Add coverage for 62-64 year olds; offer a semi-buy-in for 55-64 year olds. After all, they vote. It will take a while for many to realize that this makes an insolvent program go bankrupt more quickly.
In case these are not enough, initiate a new program. This one addresses the latest "silent crisis" (silent because it doesn't exist). What is our "silent crisis"? Hillary Rodham Clinton says it is day care.
Is establishing a day-care industry an area the federal government should even be considering? Overwhelming data show that "family care" is better than any substitute. The best-kept secret in the child-care debate is that the vast majority of American youngsters still are cared for by a parent or family member, and that's the best for the child. The logical conclusion from the social science data should be to find ways to reward the parent or extended-family member who stays with the child in the early years. But for the Clintons, the facts don't matter.
Couched in a mantle of caring, the president listed program after program to take and spend more of your money. Total cost: The White House says $ 125 billion; Congress says $ 150 billion over the next five years.
It is hard to believe Clinton forgot anything, but he did. He left out the one thing that can add to everyone's prosperity - tax reform. His omission is the Republican opportunity.
The future is not more government, but increased freedom. This is the heart of the Information Age. This means more control of our own lives. The best way to ensure individual freedom is to let individuals keep more of what they earn.
Clinton has pounded the middle class hard. Under his regime, the per capita federal tax burden has risen 32 percent. The 1993 tax increase was one of the largest in U.S. history. The federal tax burden is now $ 5,497 per person (up from $ 4,153 in 1992). Combined with state and local taxes, average middle-class families now pay nearly 40 percent of their income in taxes. That is more than they spend on food, clothing, housing and transportation combined.
Our federal tax burden, as a percentage of gross domestic product, is at a record high. The answer is tax reform and tax cuts.
Here is what the Republican Congress should do: (1) Sunset the tax code at the turn of the century. Several bills already in the hopper would do that. Pass one. (2) Income taxes include five different tax rates and innumerable phase-ins and phase-outs, loopholes and shelters. Cut tax rates and simplify the process now. (3) End the so-called marriage penalty. Now, 21 million middle-class couples are forced to pay an average of an additional $ 1,400 per year in income taxes just because they are married. Change this and dare Clinton to veto it. (4) Begin phasing in a new Social Security system. This would allow younger people to invest their own payroll taxes through IRA-like accounts, while protecting the current system for older people already in it. Middle-class Americans increasingly understand that government-run Social Security offers a pitifully poor return on their money compared with what they could get if they could invest in stocks, bonds, mutual funds or certificates of deposit. Let those who wish begin.
Let Americans keep more of their money, and spend or save it as they want. That is freedom and opportunity. That is the real way to improve the quality of life.
This is a year of choice: Do we return to the era of big government? Or go forward to a new era of independence?

Load-Date: February 24, 1998


End of Document


ALUMINIUM TAKES A HIT NEW YORK CITY LAWMAKERS ARE TRYING TO BAN BATS 1992 • Little League reported 146 injuries by batted balls. 2004 • After new standards were in effect, the number dropped to 26.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 18, 2007 Sunday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS; Pg. D1
Length: 854 words
Byline: By Jim Litke - The Associated Press
Body


Anybody over 30 can remember the first time they heard bat meet ball with a less-than-satisfying "ping" instead of a hearty "crack!" Apparently some of us haven't gotten over it still.
The latest fight over performance-enhancement in baseball isn't being waged at spring training, and it has nothing to do with HGH. It's taking place in New York, where a bill banning metal bats in high school games sailed through city council Wednesday. If the measure gains traction, it could change baseball forever.
Or not. 
New York is a big town, but it's still only one, and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg might yet veto the measure. Beyond that, chances the manufacturers would sue even before the ban takes effect next fall are about as good as Mariano Rivera protecting a ninth-inning lead. And it's been an emotional, expensive debate already.
"And I'm a conservative Republican," said James Oddo, the Staten Island councilman who led the push for the bill. "I hate government intervention."
Oddo understands there are more pressing issues. He's already been clobbered by the tabloids for pursuing a "Nanny-State" agenda. That explained his pause.
"But when the protection of student-athletes is left to people who are in bed with the metal bat companies," Oddo resumed, "someone has to do something."
When pressed, the councilman acknowledged he has no reliable data on how many kids have been severely injured by drives off metal bats - beyond the heartbreaking stories witnesses told during hearings - and no inclination to trust the numbers the industry puts forward. That's because he doesn't much trust the bodies that crunched them - the NCAA, National Federation of State High Schools and Little League Baseball, among others - even though he has no hard evidence those organizations are "in bed" with the manufacturers, either.
But Oddo sees sponsorship ties at just about every level, reads the bat ads promising ever-increasing speed and pop, and watches a few games in his district. He's sure his eyes aren't lying, no matter how many times the manufacturers insist the metal bats have been throttled back.
"We make them to specifications the associations set," said Jim Darby, a spokesman for Easton Sports, a leading bat maker. "The NCAA, Little League, the high school federation - the groups that give us our marching orders - they all keep injury statistics. He offers no data, no science, almost nothing in return. He just accuses them of being wrong. How do you base public policy on that?"
Commissioner Bud Selig sent the council a note offering some of his executives for advice, but Oddo had no luck following up. No surprise there.
The last thing Major League Baseball wants to do is stumble into another performance-enhancement fight. Especially because no one knows what would really happen to the pitchers, let alone the record book, if the best sluggers got their hands on the latest technology. In golf, where that's been the arrangement for years now, the results are decidedly mixed.
Asked whether MLB would ever allow such bats, spokesman Rich Levin referred to an answer given by Selig's predecessor, the late Bart Giamatti, in 1989. "He said as long as there are trees, there will be wooden bats in major league baseball. The policy hasn't changed since."
Technically, he's right, although MLB approved the use of some composite materials in bats in some Class-A leagues five years ago for the same reason colleges and high schools began allowing them in the mid-1970s: to save money. Back then, metal and wood bats performed equally. But as engineers at the bat companies started employing better and stronger alloys, the scale tilted drastically. Metal bats began producing faster line drives, especially dangerous when they were hit back at the pitcher. Batting averages, home runs and scores all soared.
People in the industry point to the 1998 College World Series as the final straw, when Southern California's 21-14 win over Arizona State so embarrassed the NCAA that it appointed a panel to take some of the sting out of the metal bats.
The centerpiece of the new standards the researchers drew up is a measurement called the "ball exit speed ratio (BESR)," which must be low enough so that the ball rebounds off a metal or composite bat at a maximum speed in the mid-90s. That's the same speed a ball hit on the sweet spot of a wood bat would produce, and since the standard was put in place, studies show injury rates are about the same as when only wood bats were used.
In 1992, Little League reported 146 injuries by batted balls. In 2004, after the new standards were in effect, the number was 26. In both instances, the number of players were about 2.6 million and they compiled 160 million at-bats.
"That sounds great to the uninitiated, like saying, 'Oh, we just peeled the onion back,'" Oddo said. "But it's not the reality. Any 15-year-old can tell you that.
"They went from a $50-million-a-year business to $300 million by pushing high-end, high-performance bats, and I had a kid in Staten Island eat a ball a while back. I just don't believe they have the best interests of my constituency at heart."

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - (metal bat) 

Load-Date: June 26, 2007


End of Document


FARSIGHTED HUBBLE TELESCOPE TO BOLDLY SHOW WHAT MAN HAS NEVER SEEN BEFORE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 10, 1990, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WAR PAGE; Pg. 1B
Length: 1371 words
Byline: John Noble Wilford 1990, New York Times News Service
Body


CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla.  ON THE CLEAREST of nights, high in the cool, dry mountain air, the unaided human eye can glimpse perhaps 6,000 objects in the sky - individual stars, a few planets and a multitude of galaxies composed of millions of stars but so far away they appear as single points of light.  Through the most powerful optical telescope, the ''Big Eye'' on Mount Palomar in California, with its 200-inch mirror, astronomers can make out as many as 40 billion objects and also recognize the magnificent architecture of galaxies chained together as supergalaxies spanning the sky.  When the Hubble Space Telescope is launched later this week, the vision of astronomy should be improved tenfold, bringing into focus 5 trillion to 10 trillion objects.  Stars at birth and galaxies in their infancy, planets of other stars, the age and size of the universe and its likely fate - these are among the discoveries that could come from observations with the telescope over the next 15 years.  The preparations quickened Sunday as the countdown proceeded smoothly for the space shuttle Discovery toward its planned liftoff at 8:47 a.m. today.  The five-member crew arrived in Cape Canaveral on Saturday afternoon from the Johnson Space Center in Houston for final training and instructions.  The astronauts are Air Force Col. Loren J. Shriver, Marine Col. Charles F.  Bolden Jr., Navy Capt. Bruce McCandless 2nd and two civilian scientists, Steven A. Hawley and Kathryn D. Sullivan.  Tucked snugly in the Discovery's cargo bay is the $1.5 billion telescope, a 94 1/2-inch mirror enclosed in a 43-foot-long spacecraft weighing more than 12 tons.
After 45 years of dreaming and almost 20 years of planning, development and delays, the Hubble is ready to be taken to orbit.  ''It's finally coming to pass,'' said Daniel Schroeder, an astronomer at Beloit College in Wisconsin who helped oversee the design and construction of the telescope for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.  Some scientists say the orbiting telescope promises to be the greatest leap in astronomical technology since the first ''optik stick'' used by Galileo in 1609.  The Hubble's advantage over much larger ground-based telescopes will be its position well above the roiling atmosphere enveloping Earth and obscuring so much of the heavens.  ''I'll be drunk with excitement,'' said John N. Bachall, an astrophysicist at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J., president-elect of the American Astronomical Society.  ''We'll be looking at things people have never seen before. Who knows what surprises the deity has in store?'' The exquisitely polished mirror is designed to capture and magnify light from almost the edge of the universe - and therefore near the beginning of time.  Known objects should be seen 10 times as clearly as before, with individual stars emerging from the fuzzy light of galactic clusters.  Stars and galaxies one-twenty-fifth to one-fiftieth as bright as the dimmest known objects should come into view.  Astronomers speak confidently of being able to penetrate the mysteries of black holes, those dense objects with gravity so strong light cannot escape them, and quasars, extremely distant and brilliant objects that may lie at the core of ancient galaxies.  The astronomers expect to determine whether the universe is 10 billion years old, 20 billion or something in between.  But it is an article of faith among astronomers that the telescope's greatest achievements may lie not in answering today's questions but in discovering phenomena beyond today's imagining.  Frank Six, science adviser to the Hubble project at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Ala., cautioned, ''Don't expect discoveries immediately. It's going to be several months before the telescope is wrung out and ready.'' The telescope spacecraft will not take its first picture of the heavens until about two weeks after launching.  It will be of a star cluster in the southern constellation Carina, a familiar target of no particular scientific interest but useful in calibrating the telescope's instruments and aligning optics.  Further testing and refocusing of instruments will be necessary.  Dehydration in the vacuum of space will cause some unavoidable shrinkage of the framework holding the mirrors.  After a month, Bachall said, engineers may know whether the telescope will live up to the capabilities envisaged by its most optimistic designers.  It is hoped the mirror can resolve objects so well that theoretically it could pick out the writing on a dime 100 miles away.  to p iJ i e MSW d p ''We may begin to get a reasonable amount of science data in two to three months,'' Schroeder said. A full schedule of observations is not likely to begin for eight months.  But waiting will be nothing new.  When the project was officially begun in 1977, the goal was to loft the telescope by 1983.  Technical problems, particularly with the optical systems and the guidance and pointing mechanisms, set the launching back to 1986.  Then came the Challenger shuttle disaster in January 1986, killing seven astronauts; the Hubble telescope and everything else were grounded indefinitely.  But as it turns out, project managers acknowledge, ground controllers would not have been ready in 1986.  The computer software for pointing the telescope and other complex operations was found to be inadequate and had to be completely revised, a task only recently completed.  The Challenger disaster's delay added $300 million to the project's costs for operations and testing and another $300 million for servicing and storage of the spacecraft.  Besides the cost of $1.5 billion for the spacecraft and telescope, the development of ground support facilities to test and operate the telescope and process the data will raise the total expense to $2.1 billion.  All this makes the telescope the most expensive unmanned scientific spacecraft ever built by the United States and the most complex to operate.  It involves nearly every sector of the space agency.  The 13-nation European Space Agency has borne 15 percent of the costs and supplied some equipment, in return for the guarantee of an equivalent amount of observing time by its scientists.  Riccardo Giacconi, director of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, estimated annual operations would cost about $200 million.  The plan is to have shuttle astronauts visit the telescope every five years to make repairs and install new instruments that incorporate advances in technology as well as sensors for observing the sky in different wavelengths.  But first the telescope, named for Edwin P. Hubble, an American astronomer who in the 1920s discovered that the universe was expanding, must reach orbit.  The astronauts will take the Discovery to an orbit 380 miles above Earth, the highest altitude ever attained by a shuttle crew and close to the limit, given the heavy payload.  At that altitude, the telescope should not be in danger of falling out of orbit for at least a decade, time enough for shuttle missions to give it further boosts to maintain its high orbit.  In orbit, the astronauts are to switch on power to the telescope's main electrical system and check the mechanical arm to make sure it is ready for deploying the next day.  Engineers at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., will issue a sequence of commands to the Hubble spacecraft to find out whether the telescope survived the vibrations of launching without damage.  On the second morning, with Hawley at the controls of the mechanical arm, the huge cylindrical telescope, about the size and shape of a railroad tank car, will be hoisted out the cargo bay and released overboard into an orbit side by side with the shuttle.  McCandless and Sullivan will be dressed in their pressure suits and prepared to go out on a spacewalk, if necessary, to help deploy the telescope or make any last-minute adjustments.  For two days, the shuttle and the telescope will fly in close formation while engineers on the ground continue to investigate the spacecraft's condition.  If any major problems come up, the astronauts can retrieve the spacecraft and take it back to Earth.


Graphic

 
Graphic; SKETCH by AP...An artist's conception of the orbiting Hubble Space Telescope pivoting to observe a target. SKETCH by AP...Hubble Deployment Sequence...On the second day of the mission, astronaut Steven Hawley will use Discovery's 50-foot robot arm to remove the telescope from the shuttle's payload bay. If necessary, mission specialists Bruce McCandless II and Kathryn Sullivan will don spacesuits, leave the shuttle's cabin and repair the Hubble in space....Aperture Door...Hawley attaches the robot arm to the Hubble and raises it 15 ft. to the ''low hover'' position. Then he raises it another 12 1/2 feet to the ''high hover'' position...Hawley rotates the Hubble end-over-end approximately 150 degrees. The telescope's aperture door swings within a fee feet of the shuttle's crew module...The Hubble comes to rest the the aperture door pointing slightly downward...The telescope's solar power panels and radio antennas are to be extended at 1 day, 2 hours and 20 minutes after launch...The Hubble is schedule to be released 1 day after launch, during the shuttle's 19th orbit. Thirty-two hours later, when the shuttle is 45 miles away, the aperture door is raised by remote control, allowing starlight to enter the telescope...Sources: NASA; Sky & Telescope and Aviation Week & Space TEchnology magazines.

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document


McDermott: The right has long rejected scientific facts. Now it's costing lives.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 28, 2020 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A13
Length: 881 words
Byline:  By Kevin McDermott 
Body


A half-dozen years ago, a Forbes magazine piece perfectly summed up modern conservatism's approach to science. It was about climate change, but it employed a thought process that could apply to evolution, vaccinations, trickle-down economics - and a pandemic in which America's Republican-led response has been so catastrophic that the rest of the world may soon close its doors to us.
In the 2014 piece, conservative writer John Tamny announced up front that his analysis of the scientific issue of climate change "will be wholly free of science." In case that astonishing disclaimer didn't completely invalidate the article, he proceeded to make an argument that was wholly free of even basic logic.
Despite scientists' warnings of future rising waters in coastal regions, Tamny wrote, "There's no evidence that Shanghai and New York City planners intend to build high walls to surround each city." Nonetheless, he noted, real estate prices in coastal markets continued to soar, which "suggests that some pretty smart people aren't taking the warnings of … [climate] alarmists very seriously."
This, Tamny concluded, didn't indicate that real estate markets were wrong - rather, that scientists were wrong. "I'm not a scientist," he wrote. "But I can look at market signals like anyone else can, and they reflect a catastrophe-free future that supports the view of global-warming ‘deniers.'"
That's right: When it comes to a question of science, don't trust the scientists - trust your Realtor.
Fast-forward. "More banks are getting buyers in coastal areas to make bigger down payments," The New York Times reported this month, calling it "a sign that lenders have awakened to climate dangers and want to put less of their own money at risk." Tamny's "pretty smart people" in business, it seems, are finally getting wise to the scientifically demonstrable dangers of climate change.
But that doesn't mean the conservative movement is getting wise to science.
This is the crowd, after all, that gave us "intelligent design" as a made-up alternative to the actual science of evolutionary biology. It's the crowd responsible for anti-vaccination outbreaks of measles in libertarian bastions where "freedom" is defined as being allowed to endanger other people's kids. It's the crowd that, in 2017, gave us a tax cut for the rich that economists warned would just explode the deficit without doing much for the economy - which is exactly what happened.
And it's the crowd responsible for some unknowable but undoubtedly real portion of the more than 120,000 U.S. coronavirus deaths to date.
That's virtually undeniable at this point, with a president who has purposefully twisted the simple scientific recommendations of mask-wearing, social distancing and testing and tracing into culture-war affronts. He's been abetted by a right-wing mindset that, for years now, has viewed science as a tool of "the libs," rather than a rational arbiter of fact.
Does someone have a better explanation for why America has been hit harder in the pandemic than any other nation? And, no, it's not because we're "testing too much." More Americans have died of COVID, by far, than any other nationality.
After an earlier flattening of the curve in America, led by proactive measures in blue states like New York and Illinois, infections are rising again, driven mostly by red states like Texas, Florida, Arizona, Missouri and others. These are places where Republican governors, bucking the scientists, issued stay-at-home orders generally later than in blue states, and lifted them earlier and more completely. What made them think, in defiance of the experts, that this wouldn't bring new waves of infections?
A couple decades of denying climate change data and other inconvenient science, that's what.
That dangerous tendency hasn't abated during the pandemic. Consider this remarkable conclusion from a recent national survey by Pew Research Center: "Democrats are far more likely than Republicans to think scientists should have an active role in policy debates (75% vs. 43%). Six-in-ten Democrats say scientific experts are usually better at making policy decisions about scientific issues than other people, compared with about a third of Republicans (34%). About two-thirds of Republicans (64%) think scientific experts are either worse or neither better nor worse at making science policy decisions."
Maybe the Realtors should make them?
Dr. Anthony Fauci, the face of science in the pandemic, has 24/7 security because of death threats. The European Union is considering barring Americans, like we're some third-world backwater riddled with disease. Years after that Forbes piece, New York is in fact walling itself off - not against rising waters (yet), but against incoming travel by residents of states where the virus rages while their governors fiddle.
It all sifts to ground level. A relative of mine recently returned from a southern state and reported that not only was almost no one wearing masks, but that she was getting dirty looks for wearing one. That kind of blinkered, self-destructive ignorance isn't the result of something in the water down there. It's the result of an off-the-rails conservative political movement whose contempt for science has always been wrong, and has now become deadly.

Graphic

 
 A masked man is seen on a crowded beach by the pier in Lauderdale by the Sea, Florida, on June 14. The Republican-led state has seen a record surge in coronavirus infections.(Jennifer Lett/South Florida Sun Sentinel/TNS) 

Load-Date: June 29, 2020


End of Document


Should you stay or should you go? WU astrophysics student has a website for that
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 14, 2016 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 770 words
Byline:  By Aisha Sultan St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


When Rashied Amini's girlfriend wanted to break up two years ago, he wondered if he could mathematically prove that they should stay together.
Amini was working as a systems engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the time. He knew how to build predictive models about space missions using algorithms.
Relationships aren't rocket science, but maybe he could apply the same approach to matters of the heart.
He returned to his alma mater to pursue a doctorate in astrophysics at Washington University, while also developing a romance predictor.
On Friday, he launched Nanaya.co, an online site that can predict the user's chances of finding an ideal match, where it's most likely to happen, when you should settle down and how happy you're likely to be in the relationship. There's also a section on how to change your current behavior, such as where and with whom you socialize, to increase your odds of meeting your ideal match. The site is currently free.
"As a theorist whose job it is to come up with models that represent reality that you can make decisions from, I thought I could do this," he said. The idea of making personal decisions based on information and science has been around for a while. But because romance is so subjective it can be the hardest problem to solve simply based on data.
On the site, users begin by taking a romantic personality test. Then, there are questions about lifestyle preferences, values, future goals and one's experiences being single. It also takes into account your deal-breakers in a future partner.
It's different from the plethora of dating or matchmaking websites; some of which also use algorithms to match users with likely partners. Nanaya's predictions are based on the user's responses in relation to all the other data collected from the rest of the users in its database. Currently, about 22,000 people have taken the personality test, which enabled him to design the beta.
Before Amini adds the "stay together or break up" feature in the reports, he wants to reach at least 100,000 users to make the results more reliable. The site is aimed at people in their 20s and 30s who are wondering whether to stay in a relationship or continue to play the field.
Roman Solowski, 33, filled out an early version of Amini's questionnaire to help out his buddy from college. At the time, Solowski had been dating his girlfriend for nearly a year and a half. His results indicated that until age 35 he would be happiest in a relationship with her, but after that age he would be happier single.
"How are you supposed to interpret that?" he said.
Solowski proposed anyway. So far, he says things are going well.
"Maybe you should ask me two years from now," he said. Solowski, a lawyer in Chicago, never shared the results with his wife.
"I don't want to cause any trouble," he said. "I don't think anyone is going to take it very well."
Amini said Solowski's results did not predict that he and his wife will break up eventually. The analysis suggests that there were favorable odds that Solowski could have met a better match years down the line.
"The main feedback is merely to consider it. Not because it's the truth, but just food for thought," Amini said. "I like to think this a vehicle for self-awareness more than anything else."
Bill Wing, co-founder of the Relationship Center of St. Louis, says most people get "a little itchy" around age 35. It may be a good time for anyone to work on their relationships, he said. Wing sees value in using Amini's tool as one part of a decision-making process.
"I think it's an excellent idea" when considering a potential life partner, Wing said. "So many times we stay with people because they are familiar."
"You don't want to settle because you are fearful or worried about whether there is anyone else out there," he added. Wing, who has counseled hundreds of couples over a career spanning more than 35 years, cautioned that regardless of whom a person marries, two-thirds of differences that arise will be perpetual and unresolvable. The couple's long-term success lies in how they deal with those differences.
"I'm not sure if there's an algorithm for that," he said.
As far as Amini's relationship that inspired the site, it ended regardless of what the math advised.
Amini, 30, plans to defend his dissertation this summer and rejoin the engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. While working more than 100 hours a week on this site and his doctorate, he didn't have time for dating. But his own Nanaya analysis says he should settle down at age 31 to 32.
So, he will be back on market soon enough looking for the stars to align.

Graphic

 
 Nanaya, an app designed by Rashied Amini. It claims to help people "make life's hardest decisions and empower you to change your future with the power of science and big data."  Nanaya, an app designed by Rashied Amini. It claims to help people "make life's hardest decisions and empower you to change your future with the power of science and big data."  Nanaya, an app designed by Rashied Amini. It claims to help people "make life's hardest decisions and empower you to change your future with the power of science and big data."  Nanaya, an app designed by Rashied Amini. It claims to help people "make life's hardest decisions and empower you to change your future with the power of science and big data."  Nanaya, an app designed by Rashied Amini. It claims to help people "make life's hardest decisions and empower you to change your future with the power of science and big data."  Nanaya, an app designed by Rashied Amini. It claims to help people "make life's hardest decisions and empower you to change your future with the power of science and big data."  Rashied Amini Founder, Nanaya 

Load-Date: February 15, 2016


End of Document


Cry it out? Why not ... and let's debunk some more parenting myths
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 15, 2015 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: HOME & AWAY; Pg. H1
Length: 679 words
Byline:  DIRTY LAUNDRY • By Aisha Sultan > St. Louis Post-Dispatch 
Body


Our grandmas and Jenny McCarthy are guilty of the same crime.
They've pushed some bit of parenting advice, unfounded in science but still a deeply held belief, rooted in intuition and circulated by word-of-mouth.
This is not to malign Granny, nor her intentions. There's wisdom that comes with experience, and it is valuable in its own right.
McCarthy, however, took parenting myth-making to towering destructive heights when she claimed years ago that a vaccine caused her son's autism. (Any link between autism and vaccines has been widely discredited.)
From the minor to the monumental, myths about raising children number in the hundreds, and we all likely buy into at least a few of them.
Professors Stephen Hupp and Jeremy Jewell set out to debunk common parenting lore with the best available science. They are co-authors of newly published "Great Myths of Child Development" and teach psychology at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville.
"I grew up in Missouri. It's the show-me state," Hupp said. "I was raised to be skeptical about claims." He is the father to two children and was surprised by some of the things he discovered while researching the book, including scientific rarities such as women who are able to get pregnant again early in their pregnancies. It's rare, but a woman can carry two babies conceived on different dates.
The 50 myths they deconstruct in their book cover the time from conception to adolescence. I was most interested in the ideas we accept that feed our own collective guilt or sense of superiority.
For example, there's a widespread belief that attachment parenting creates a stronger bond between a parent and child. The authors evaluated this claim by looking at research that sought to answer three questions: Are there lasting impacts for a mother and child to immediately bond after birth; are there benefits to long-term breast-feeding (beyond two years); does nightly co-sleeping promote attachment?
In each of these cases, they found no evidence of lasting benefits of these behaviors.
With attachment parenting, "it's not like we criticize every aspect," Hupp said. "We just want parents to be cautious. Not everything tied to attachment parenting is a research-supported idea."
They also found that research supports the "cry-it-out" method for sleep-training babies as effective without long-term negative effects. Also under the umbrella of things parents feel guilty about but shouldn't: Children who have spent time in day care do just as well later in life as children who haven't. Day care does not hurt parent-child attachment, Hupp said.
I fall on the attachment side of the early childhood parenting divide, but I can accept that I may not have chosen that path because of long-term benefits to my child but rather, short-term benefits to myself. It felt like I was fighting evolutionary instincts to let a baby cry it out at night, even if I knew intellectually it would not permanently scar a child to learn how to sleep alone.
This is how it goes with many of the myths we choose to believe. They are repeated often. They make intuitive sense. They appeal to our fears, anxieties or offer an explanation for an unknown.
Plus, science evolves. Data are imperfect. Even the experts change their minds over time.
But a lot can be learned by challenging conventional wisdom and looking at which scientifically tested ideas can make us better parents. Hupp and Jewell's book offers these evidence-backed tips: Brief timeouts are an effective tool in decreasing challenging behaviors in toddlers. But, "scared straight" programs designed to prevent delinquency actually lead to a greater likelihood to commit future crimes.
On the other hand, parents who give children commands with praise are likely to see greater compliance. Rewards used to increase desirable behavior in children actually work. Hupp said parents can use a reward to start a new behavior then gradually phase out the reward over time. This may be one of those places where science confirms age-old wisdom.
Turns out, bribes work.
Grandma could have told us that.

Graphic

 
 Jenny McCarthy parlayed her Playmate of the Year honor into a successful TV and movie career. She is single again, having recently announced she has split up with Bears' linebacker Brian Urlacher. Happy 40th, Miss October 1993! 

Load-Date: March 16, 2015


End of Document


SECOND MARS ROVER STRETCHES ITS WHEELS, GETS READY TO ROLL
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 30, 2004 Friday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 309 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: PASADENA, CALIF.
Body


NASA's Opportunity rover stretched out its rear wheels Thursday in preparation for rolling onto the surface of Mars, possibly a day earlier than expected, and the space agency said its twin, Spirit, "will be perfect again" after repairs of crippling software problems.
Except for its robotic arm, Opportunity finished unfolding and standing up from its landing position and was ready to travel the final 10 feet from its lander to the surface of Mars, possibly late Saturday, project manager Pete Theisinger said in an interview.
NASA earlier had said Opportunity could be ready to reach the surface by Sunday.
Engineers continued to make progress on Spirit, which has been sidelined for more than a week on the other side of Mars.
They were preparing to wipe its flash memory clean of science and engineering files that have stymied its software, said Jennifer Trosper, a mission manager. The fix, likely to be made today, could restore Spirit to full health.
"I think it will be perfect again," Theisinger said.
Spirit resumed acquiring science data Thursday, using its panoramic camera to focus on two rocks scientists have called Cake and Blanco.
To smooth Opportunity's way to the Martian surface, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration adjusted the forward tilt of its lander, pushing the platform downward so the tips of the preferred exit ramp dug into the Martian soil.
Spirit has resumed using its high-gain antenna, which speeds transmission of the data needed to debug the rover's problems.
The first picture it took in more than a week was a simple black-and-white photograph showing the rover's robotic arm pressed to a football-sized rock, exactly as it was poised before the problems started.
"It's more indication of Spirit's slow progression back to health," said Cornell University astronomer Steve Squyres, the mission's main scientist.

Notes

NATION/ Link to a panorama of Mars online at STLtoday.com/links.


Load-Date: January 30, 2004


End of Document


China hub closer to takeoff : Tax credit deal • Nixon calls for session on job creation incentives. 2 programs may get hit • Historic, low-income credits would be cut.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 21, 2011 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1361 words
Byline: By Tim Logan , tlogan@post-dispatch.com,  > 314-340-8291 and Jason Hancock , jhancock@post-dispatch.com,  > 573-635-6178
Dateline: 0 
Body


After months of quiet negotiations, legislators rushed to the microphones Wednesday to trumpet a tax credit deal that could pave the way for data centers, science startups and Chinese cargo flights in St. Louis.
Leaders of the Missouri House and Senate visited St. Louis - a bevy of local bigwigs by their side - to unveil a massive package of changes to the state's menu of job creation incentives, a package they have been hammering out behind closed doors since the legislative session broke in May.
"This is a monumental piece of legislation," said Senate President Pro Tem Rob Mayer, R-Dexter.
Minutes after their news conference ended at Lambert-St. Louis International Airport, Gov. Jay Nixon said he would give lawmakers a chance to vote on their plan. In a statement, he called the deal "another important step," and pledged to call them back to Jefferson City for a special session - likely in September.
The bill legislators laid out Wednesday would cut up to $1.5 billion in spending on tax credits over the next decade even as it creates several new programs.
Chief among them is the Aerotropolis tax credit, which supporters say is key to efforts to turn Lambert into a global cargo player. The $360 million package would subsidize overseas cargo flights from Lambert and facilities to handle their contents.
"This compromise brings us a big step toward realizing the vision of Lambert as the international cargo hub we all know it can be," said St. Louis Mayor Francis Slay.
The bill also would create several new programs long prized by local businesses, among them tax breaks for centers that house large banks of computers, a stream of state funding to help launch technology startups and a $3 million-a-year credit to bring amateur sports events such as the NCAA Final Four to Missouri. It could even open a window to return control of the St. Louis Police Department to the mayor's office - something Mayer and House Speaker Steven Tilley, R-Perryville, said Wednesday that they would support.
To do all that, while also cutting overall spending, the plan would take a bite out of two big programs that have long been popular in St. Louis: tax credits for historic preservation and low-income housing.
The proposal would lower the cap on historic credits to $90 million a year, from its current $140 million. It also would drop low-income credits to $130 million, from about $190 million now. It would prohibit using most low-income credits on projects that receive historic credits, and it would put both programs up for review by the Legislature in 2018.
Tilley, long a defender of both programs, agreed that the cuts would affect development, but he said they were necessary for consensus on the larger deal.
"I'm not sold on every part of this package," he said. "But I'm 100 percent supportive of the totality of it."
Developers, too, said they had some concerns - particularly about the ban on so-called "stacking of low-income and historic credits" - but they acknowledged that they can't win every fight. So they have focused on technical changes they hope will make the programs easier to use.
"We have been actively talking to folks and trying to get our position across. We've been effective at that," said Stephen Acree, chairman of the Missouri Workforce Housing Association. "But either it's going to get done, or there's no bill and this all starts over again next year."
While the development community sounded resigned, supporters of a China hub were jubilant. Members of the Midwest China Hub Commission were meeting Wednesday morning as word trickled out about the deal, and there were backslaps and congratulations all around.
The timing couldn't be better, said Lambert Director Rhonda Hamm-Niebruegge. A technical delegation from China Eastern was due to arrive in St. Louis on Wednesday night to meet with cargo companies at Lambert.
"We think they're here to finalize things and get all the pieces in place," to sign a contract with the airport, Hamm-Niebruegge said. She was still hopeful that flights could start in September, the start of peak season for pre-holiday air cargo shipments. She and others involved in the talks stressed that Aerotropolis credits are a key piece of the puzzle.
"There should be no assuming that there will be a deal without the Senate package," said Richard McClure, who represents Civic Progress on the hub commission.
Despite Wednesday's news, hurdles remain. Chief among them is concern by senators who haven't yet signed on.
Senate rules enable a member to filibuster bills they don't like, potentially blocking their progress, and Sen. Chuck Purgason, R-Caulfield, has a long track record of opposing state tax credits. Last summer, he launched a 20-hour filibuster against an incentive package for a Ford Motor Co. plant near Kansas City.
Wednesday, Purgason said he was shocked to hear that a deal had been struck, especially because he talked with Senate leaders Tuesday night and had not been told that a deal was imminent.
"So far, all I've seen is an outline," he said. "We have a concept, but as of right now it's only 80 to 90 percent worked out. You can't really call this a 'deal' when we don't have anything in writing."
Purgason supported a version of the Aerotropolis bill that cleared the Senate in May. But this bill, he said, doesn't include changes to the Missouri Downtown Economic Stimulus Act, which uses state money to fund downtown projects.
"There is still a lot of confusion among senators about what's in this bill," he said.
Also unclear is where Nixon stands.
After launching a tax credit review panel last fall - which came up with recommendations not far from what is now on the table - he has kept a low profile on the issue. Sen. Eric Schmitt, R-Glendale, was a key negotiator who said Nixon's office played little role in talks since the legislative session ended. Wednesday morning, Nixon's economic development chief, David Kerr, said he hadn't yet been briefed on the plan.
At the news conference that afternoon, Tilley and Mayer said they hoped to sit down with Nixon's office early next week to lay out the proposal and urge him to call a special session. Nixon didn't wait. Within an hour, his statement came out.
"The Governor intends to call the General Assembly into special session to focus on passing this bi-partisan jobs package and moving our economy forward," it read.
Then, a few minutes later his office re-sent the statement, replacing "this bi-partisan jobs package" with "a bi-partisan jobs package." Perhaps the change was to fix a typo.
Perhaps it was to give the governor a little wiggle room. Either way, Nixon is scheduled to make his viewpoints a little clearer today in Creve Coeur in a "major policy address on business development."
---
Details of the deal
The tax credit package put forth by House and Senate leaders Wednesday includes:
- $360 million over 16 years for Aerotropolis tax credits. Of that, $300 million would subsidize cargo facilities and $60 million could be used by airlines.
- Creation of the Missouri Science and Innovation Reinvestment Act, which would dedicate some tax revenue to help attract high-tech companies.
- Breaks on state and local taxes for data centers, which house large banks of computers.
- Tax credits to attract amateur sporting events, totaling $13 million per year through 2017.
- Capping historic tax credits at $80 million per year, with $10 million set aside for small projects. The program is now capped at $140 million with small projects exempt from a cap.
- Capping one kind of low-income housing tax credits at $110 million, down from about $130 million now. A separate category of the credits would be capped at $20 million, down from $60 million, and be phased out altogether in 2015.
- A ban on using historic and low-income credits on the same project, and a requirement that lawmakers review both programs in 2018.
- Restructuring the board of the Missouri Housing Development Commission, which awards low-income housing credits, to replace statewide elected officials with members appointed by the House and Senate.
- A provision that would make renters ineligible for the Senior Citizen Property Tax Credit.

Notes

 MATSON'S VIEW 


Graphic

 
 Photo by Johnny Andrews  •  jandrews@post-dispatch.com  St. Louis County Executive Charlie Dooley speaks Wednesday as (from left in background) House Speaker Steven Tilley, Senate President Pro Tem Rob Mayer and St. Louis Mayor Francis Slay listen during a press conference at Lambert-St. Louis International Airport.  Photo by Johnny Andrews  •  jandrews@post-dispatch.com  The old McDonnell Douglas cargo area, which was bought out by Boeing and is now owned by the airport, is visible in the distance Wednesday.  

Load-Date: July 21, 2011


End of Document


RECENT DATA SUGGEST THAT OUR WINTERS WILL BE GETTING A LOT COLDER
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 4, 2000, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A14; George Johnson On Science Column
Length: 837 words
Byline: George Johnson
Body


Is it my imagination, or have the past decade's winters been uncommonly mild? In the 1970s, single-digit winter mornings were common, and below-zero not unheard-of. I don't remember so many really cold days in recent years. While I have no doubt these milder winters reflect global warming to some degree, in far larger measure they seem to reflect a decades-long weather pattern in the Pacific Ocean, a pattern that seems to be changing.
This pattern has a cumbersome name, the Pacific Decadal Oscillation. To understand it, you need to first come to grips with something called El Nino. Until about 20 years ago, no one talked of El Nino. Now it is used to explain everything from hurricanes to why my dog runs in circles. Just what is an El Nino?
Every Christmas, a tepid current sweeps down the coast of Peru and Ecuador from the tropics, reducing the fish population slightly and giving local fishermen some time off. The local fishermen named this Christmas current El Nino (literally, the child, after the Christ Child). Now, though, the term is reserved for a catastrophic version of the same phenomenon, one that occurs every seven years or so and is felt not only locally but globally.
Scientists now have a pretty good idea of what goes on in an El Nino. Th ink of the Pacific Ocean as a giant saucer of water with a very powerful fan blowing over it. Normally the Pacific Ocean is fanned by constantly blowing east-to-west trade winds that push warm surface water away from the ocean's eastern side (Peru, Ecuador and Chile). This surface water piles up in the west, around Australia and the Philippines, making it several degrees warmer and a yard or so higher than the eastern side of the ocean.
El Nino starts as a minor glitch in this picture. One day, if the winds slacken briefly, warm water begins to slosh back across the ocean. Once this happens, ocean and atmosphere conspire to ensure it keeps happening. The warmer the eastern ocean gets, the warmer and lighter the air above it becomes, and hence more similar to the air on the western side. This reduces the difference in pressure across the ocean. Because a pressure difference is what makes winds blow, the easterly trades weaken further, letting the warm water continue its eastward advance.
The result is to shift the weather systems of the western Pacific Ocean 3,700 miles eastward. As the warm water moves east, so do the clouds. The tropical rainstorms that usually drench Indonesia and the Philippines now soak the western edge of South America.
St. Louis is a long way from South America, but not far enough to escape El Nino's influence. The enormous air masses of an El Nino event shove other air out of the way, triggering effects like falling dominos across the world's weather systems. El Nino drives moist Pacific air across Mexico into the Gulf of Mexico, producing rain along the Gulf Coast. A lot of this gulf moisture finds its way to St. Louis, producing heavier-than-normal rains here. In addition, El Nino pushes the polar jet stream up into Canada, so that we in St. Louis avoid the jet stream's icy grip and experience a warmer-than-usual winter. In essence, then, El Nino is a gardener's dream, giving St. Louisans mild, wet winters. 1997 was such an El Nino winter, pleasant with lots of rain.
An El Nino does not last long - too much is out of balance. The correction is called La Nina. La Nina is a Pacific weather pattern that is the opposite of El Nino, driving warm Pacific surface water back westward from South America and so correcting the heat imbalance that El Nino produced.
You may have noticed that it's dry this winter in St. Louis, and cold. We are in the grips of La Nina now. A satellite that measures ocean temperatures shows us a cold tongue last month that extended out 3,000 miles into the Pacific from Ecuador. With so much warm water flowing toward Asia, the path of the polar jet stream over North America is pulled southward, drawing frigid air down into the United States and giving us colder winters. The tropical jet stream that blows across Mexico and the gulf weakens, drying out the gulf states. As a result, there is less moist gulf air to circulate to St. Louis and produce rain, so we can expect to have less rain than normal this winter.
Now to get back to the Pacific Decadal Oscillation. It is a long-term flip-flop in Pacific Ocean weather patterns. Over a 30-year interval from the mid-1940s to the mid-1970s, waters in the eastern tropical Pacific tended to be cooler, favoring La Nina patterns (32 percent of the years were La Nina, 24 percent El Nino). Then, for a reason no one understands, the pattern flipped. Since the mid-1970s, these waters have been warmer, favoring El Nino events (16 percent of the years were La Nina, 40 percent El Nino). Now, based on the past two years' satellite data, weather scientists tell us the pattern may have flopped back again.
If so, our winters are going to flop back, too, back to the good old days of frigid winter mornings. Hope they're wrong.     

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC New York Times Graphic Chart - Pacific Sea Change
 A flip-flop in Pacific Ocean sea temperatures may have a decades long effect on weather across North America, favoring more frequent La Nina weather patterns.

 Graphic / Illustration - La Nina … January 2000 (Graphic of the world shows La Nina weather pattern.)

 Graphic / Illustration - EQUATORIAL PACIFIC OCEAN (Graphic of the world shows weather pattern over the Pacific Ocean.)

 High, wamr waters indicated by whites shift to cool, lower seas, indicated by darker shades.

 Source: Jet propulsion Laboratory / NASA.

Load-Date: February 4, 2000


End of Document


RECENT DATA SUGGEST THAT OUR WINTERS WILL BE GETTING A LOT COLDER
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 4, 2000, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A14; George Johnson On Science Column
Length: 837 words
Byline: George Johnson
Body


Is it my imagination, or have the past decade's winters been uncommonly mild? In the 1970s, single-digit winter mornings were common, and below-zero not unheard-of. I don't remember so many really cold days in recent years. While I have no doubt these milder winters reflect global warming to some degree, in far larger measure they seem to reflect a decades-long weather pattern in the Pacific Ocean, a pattern that seems to be changing.
This pattern has a cumbersome name, the Pacific Decadal Oscillation. To understand it, you need to first come to grips with something called El Nino. Until about 20 years ago, no one talked of El Nino. Now it is used to explain everything from hurricanes to why my dog runs in circles. Just what is an El Nino?
Every Christmas, a tepid current sweeps down the coast of Peru and Ecuador from the tropics, reducing the fish population slightly and giving local fishermen some time off. The local fishermen named this Christmas current El Nino (literally, the child, after the Christ Child). Now, though, the term is reserved for a catastrophic version of the same phenomenon, one that occurs every seven years or so and is felt not only locally but globally.
Scientists now have a pretty good idea of what goes on in an El Nino. Th ink of the Pacific Ocean as a giant saucer of water with a very powerful fan blowing over it. Normally the Pacific Ocean is fanned by constantly blowing east-to-west trade winds that push warm surface water away from the ocean's eastern side (Peru, Ecuador and Chile). This surface water piles up in the west, around Australia and the Philippines, making it several degrees warmer and a yard or so higher than the eastern side of the ocean.
El Nino starts as a minor glitch in this picture. One day, if the winds slacken briefly, warm water begins to slosh back across the ocean. Once this happens, ocean and atmosphere conspire to ensure it keeps happening. The warmer the eastern ocean gets, the warmer and lighter the air above it becomes, and hence more similar to the air on the western side. This reduces the difference in pressure across the ocean. Because a pressure difference is what makes winds blow, the easterly trades weaken further, letting the warm water continue its eastward advance.
The result is to shift the weather systems of the western Pacific Ocean 3,700 miles eastward. As the warm water moves east, so do the clouds. The tropical rainstorms that usually drench Indonesia and the Philippines now soak the western edge of South America.
St. Louis is a long way from South America, but not far enough to escape El Nino's influence. The enormous air masses of an El Nino event shove other air out of the way, triggering effects like falling dominos across the world's weather systems. El Nino drives moist Pacific air across Mexico into the Gulf of Mexico, producing rain along the Gulf Coast. A lot of this gulf moisture finds its way to St. Louis, producing heavier-than-normal rains here. In addition, El Nino pushes the polar jet stream up into Canada, so that we in St. Louis avoid the jet stream's icy grip and experience a warmer-than-usual winter. In essence, then, El Nino is a gardener's dream, giving St. Louisans mild, wet winters. 1997 was such an El Nino winter, pleasant with lots of rain.
An El Nino does not last long - too much is out of balance. The correction is called La Nina. La Nina is a Pacific weather pattern that is the opposite of El Nino, driving warm Pacific surface water back westward from South America and so correcting the heat imbalance that El Nino produced.
You may have noticed that it's dry this winter in St. Louis, and cold. We are in the grips of La Nina now. A satellite that measures ocean temperatures shows us a cold tongue last month that extended out 3,000 miles into the Pacific from Ecuador. With so much warm water flowing toward Asia, the path of the polar jet stream over North America is pulled southward, drawing frigid air down into the United States and giving us colder winters. The tropical jet stream that blows across Mexico and the gulf weakens, drying out the gulf states. As a result, there is less moist gulf air to circulate to St. Louis and produce rain, so we can expect to have less rain than normal this winter.
Now to get back to the Pacific Decadal Oscillation. It is a long-term flip-flop in Pacific Ocean weather patterns. Over a 30-year interval from the mid-1940s to the mid-1970s, waters in the eastern tropical Pacific tended to be cooler, favoring La Nina patterns (32 percent of the years were La Nina, 24 percent El Nino). Then, for a reason no one understands, the pattern flipped. Since the mid-1970s, these waters have been warmer, favoring El Nino events (16 percent of the years were La Nina, 40 percent El Nino). Now, based on the past two years' satellite data, weather scientists tell us the pattern may have flopped back again.
If so, our winters are going to flop back, too, back to the good old days of frigid winter mornings. Hope they're wrong.     

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC New York Times Graphic Chart - Pacific Sea Change
 A flip-flop in Pacific Ocean sea temperatures may have a decades long effect on weather across North America, favoring more frequent La Nina weather patterns.

 Graphic / Illustration - La Nina … January 2000 (Graphic of the world shows La Nina weather pattern.)

 Graphic / Illustration - EQUATORIAL PACIFIC OCEAN (Graphic of the world shows weather pattern over the Pacific Ocean.)

 High, wamr waters indicated by whites shift to cool, lower seas, indicated by darker shades.

 Source: Jet propulsion Laboratory / NASA.

Load-Date: February 4, 2000


End of Document


Antonio French: As mass shootings resume, it's time to finally take a data-driven approach









Letters to the editor, March 14









Virus tolls similar across the nation despite governors' differing actions









St. Louis Public Library has soft reopening as others plan March returns









SIUC OFFERS FREE SCIENCE WORKSHOPS FOR TEACHERS









Ken Schechtman: Can scientific thinking and progressive activism coexist?









Letters to the editor, Feb. 22









Editorial: Americans aren't reassured by a president who prefers his 'gut' over science









Study finds COVID-19 vaccine may reduce virus transmission (copy)









Word detectives: Science may help finger opinion columnist









Sultan: The truth about Helen Keller and why it matters









EDUCATORS CRITICIZE SCIENCE TEACHING









In CDC's backyard, school reopening divides experts









Meet the 2019 Post-Dispatch Scholar Athletes STLHSS SCHOLAR ATHLETES









West and north St. Louis County hit hardest by COVID-19, new data shows









Major global warming study again questioned, again defended









New data: Americans filling far fewer opioid prescriptions









States will start getting COVID-19 vaccine Monday, US says









'Food tech' company Benson Hill formally opens new headquarters in Creve Coeur









POLY-SCI MAJOR'S REALITY CHECK CAN BE FOUND IN THE NUMBERS









Drama ends for Monsanto: Bayer buys it for $66 billion









In move to reopen, counties in St. Louis area take varying paths









Business Calendar









Fever-monitoring company places Missouri at top of watchlist for coronavirus surge









'SCIENCE' OF COMEDY: YEAH, RIGHT









African-American participation in elite AP classes lags at St. Louis area schools









Common Core stirs fear and distrust National standards, meant to boost achievement, instead fuel worries about federal influence.









Creve Coeur-based Benson Hill reels in $150 million in ag-tech company's latest round of funding









People in Business: Deli Star names new R&D director









People in Business









Cable trouble dogs spacewalking astronauts









People in Business: Bull named to lead product development at Benson Hill









Officials to probe data meddling Trump aides allegedly pressured CDC to alter weekly disease reports









To reach climate goal, Monsanto needs help from customers









Science Center wants tech leader Willing to pay for president strong in education and science.









Mizzou wins $12 million, 5-year contract to train NGA employees in St. Louis, Washington









Pac-12 football season to kick off in November









MARS ROVER HAS STOPPED SENDING DATA TO EARTH









Joe's St. Louis: As Foodie Cities go, our fair metropolis is ‘Midwest hotspot'









People in Business









Monsanto says no to big deals









People in Business: Purnell joins BJC to focus on community health









Laura Jean Bierut: Breaking the opioid-addiction chain









Illinois to move to next phase of reopening Friday, allowing indoor dining









Six weeks into stay-at-home order, Illinois governor announces phased reopening plan









New research facilities mark biggest milestone of Monsanto's $400 million Chesterfield expansion - Correction Appended









Its weedkillers under attack, Bayer develops new herbicide









Wash. U. professor takes genetics research to wider student audience









Local lawmakers weigh what they can - and cannot - regulate in budding business









People in Business: Hoeffner to lead new division at Cass Commercial Bank









Joe's St. Louis: Hamm lands new role. Animal advocate remembered. And you're welcome, KC.









Business digest









CASE NOT CLOSED









People in Business









Editorial: Once again, Trump pushes greenhouse rollbacks even industry doesn't want.









KANSAS ELECTION SPELLS END TO SCHOOL STANDARDS PLAYING DOWN EVOLUTION;CONSERVATIVE MEMBERS OF STATE BOARD ARE DEFEATED









Rodney Davis: Don't succumb to us-versus-them pandemic mentality









MORNING BRIEFING









NATION / WORLD BRIEFS









TI FACES HAND-HELD CHALLENGE









NEW SCIENCE CURRICULUM AIMS TO GIVE BETTER UNDERSTANDING 'OF BIG PICTURE'









Vdigest 11-23-20









SCIENCE WORLD SUFFERS SOME SETBACKS WITH LOSS OF HANDIWORK BY HARD-WORKING CREW; RESEARCH RANGED FROM CANCER SPREAD TO FIRE SUPPRESSION









IMPLANTS WORK LIKE BLACK BOXES FOR HUMAN HEALTH









Cards' scouting director is homegrown Correa's goal is for the Redbirds to perform even better in the draft. CARDINALS BASEBALL









HOSPITALS COMPUTERIZE BEDSIDE MANNER IN FACE OF RISING COSTS









Cardinals vs. Astros: An analytics morality tale









Book, tour thrust Palin back into the public eye Her performance will count more than content of tome, experts say, but comeback chance called slim.









Allen, Robert (Bob) E. Died July 1st









A potentially historic step Economic development • Regional leaders support Missouri jobs legislation. OTHER VIEWS









Safety board wants "black boxes" in vehicles









Smithfield closes South Dakota pork plant due to coronavirus









Hochman: Study says Blues will get boost with Yeo









University says S. Korean faked data on stem cells









HEALTH & SCIENCE NOTES









Pfizer says COVID-19 vaccine is looking 90% effective (copy)









RESEARCHERS SAY NEW DATA SHOW THREAT OF QUAKE IS BUILDING ALONG NEW MADRID;FAULT;STUDY SAYS THAT STRAIN IS MOUNTING MORE THAN PREVIOUS EVIDENCE INDICATED









HEALTH DIGEST









EDUCATION DIGEST









5 MINUTES WITH ...;MONSANTO'S NEW VP SEES STRATEGY THROUGH WIDE-ANGLE LENS









New rules planned to reduce risk of deadly oil train fires









SPACEWALK TRAINING HEAVY ON MUSCLES;HUBBLE TEAM ASTRONAUTS NOT 'PILLSBURY DOUGHBOYS'









SPOTLIGHT COLUMN









TALKING WITH...CHILD DEVELOPMENT COUNSELOR JULIE SPACKMAN RESIGNING YOURSELF; TO BEING ORGANIZED









Trumpeter swans' population comeback on full display at the confluence









ASTRONAUTS TAKE LAST WALK TO FINISH HUBBLE REPAIRS;$ 3 BILLION TELESCOPE IS SET TO CUT LOOSE FROM SHUTTLE DISCOVERY TODAY









BRIEFS; GERMANY TRAINS COLLIDE NEAR BERLIN; 3 KILLED









Cardinals Insider: Correa eyes future Cardinals









NASA EXULTS, HOPES HUBBLE MAY SOON LOOK BACK TO THE FUTURE









ON LINE HUBBLE TELESCOPE'S BALKY ANTENNA IS FINALLY ON THE JOB









THE ERA OF BIG GOVERNMENT IS BACK









ALUMINIUM TAKES A HIT NEW YORK CITY LAWMAKERS ARE TRYING TO BAN BATS 1992 • Little League reported 146 injuries by batted balls. 2004 • After new standards were....









FARSIGHTED HUBBLE TELESCOPE TO BOLDLY SHOW WHAT MAN HAS NEVER SEEN BEFORE









McDermott: The right has long rejected scientific facts. Now it's costing lives.









Should you stay or should you go? WU astrophysics student has a website for that









Cry it out? Why not ... and let's debunk some more parenting myths









SECOND MARS ROVER STRETCHES ITS WHEELS, GETS READY TO ROLL









China hub closer to takeoff : Tax credit deal • Nixon calls for session on job creation incentives. 2 programs may get hit • Historic, low-income credits would ....









RECENT DATA SUGGEST THAT OUR WINTERS WILL BE GETTING A LOT COLDER









RECENT DATA SUGGEST THAT OUR WINTERS WILL BE GETTING A LOT COLDER







